As the weekend approaches, New York City is gearing up for a feast of cinema. With a wide variety of movie theaters screening some of the best film series in the world, the opportunities to catch up on your favorite franchise are numerous. We’ve narrowed down the list to three top picks for your consideration.

1. The Lord of the Rings Trilogy at The Museum of Moving Image
The Museum of Moving Image is hosting an epic trilogy marathon of J.R.R. Tolkien’s renowned fantasy novels. Follow the journey of Frodo, Sam, and the rest of the Fellowship of the Ring as they embark on their quest to destroy the One Ring of power. The screening is spread out over three days, so you can experience Middle Earth to the fullest. You'll see the films projected in their original 35mm format and the screenings will feature Q&A’s with experts on the making of the epic franchise.

2. The Godfather Trilogy at IFC Center
IFC Center is celebrating one of the greatest movie series of all time with a weekend-long screening of all three Godfather films including the third and final installment . Francis Ford Coppola’s mafia masterpiece follows the Corleone family as they navigate power, politics, and bloodshed in post-World War II New York. Both critics and audiences agree: The Godfather series is a must-see for any movie lover.

3. The Harry Potter Film Series at Alamo Drafthouse
Calling all Potterheads: Alamo Drafthouse is hosting all eight films from J.K. Rowling’s wizarding world, starting Friday and ending on Sunday. The screening schedule includes back-to-back marathons of the entire franchise, as well as standalone shows of individual films. This cinematic journey will transport you to the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, where Harry, Hermione, and Ron face off against the evil Lord Voldemort and his Death Eaters.

Whether you’re looking to lose yourself in a fantasy epic or enjoy a classic mafia drama, these three film series offer an escape from reality and are perfect for a weekend movie marathon. From Middle Earth to New York City and the mystical world of wizards, there's something for every taste. Just grab some popcorn and settle in for a great weekend at the movies.