Jack Garfein, an acclaimed director and acting teacher who gained international recognition during the heyday of New York City’s Actors Studio, passed away on December 7th, 2021, at the age of 89.

Garfein was born in Mukacevo, Czechoslovakia (now Ukraine) in 1930. As a child, he survived the Holocaust by hiding in a hole under his family's house for several months. After World War II, Garfein emigrated to the United States and eventually joined the Actors Studio - a prominent acting school founded by Elia Kazan, Robert Lewis, and Cheryl Crawford in 1947.

Garfein quickly became a prolific teacher at the Actors Studio, and his students included legendary actors such as James Dean, Paul Newman, and Steve McQueen. He also directed several groundbreaking productions that explored taboo topics, such as sexual assault and mental illness.

In 1956, Garfein made his directorial debut with "The Strange One," a film adaptation of Calder Willingham's play "End as a Man." The film, which starred Ben Gazzara and George Peppard, received critical acclaim for its portrayal of toxic masculinity in a military academy. Garfein's second feature film, "Something Wild" (1961), dealt with the aftermath of a young woman's kidnapping and sexual assault - a subject that was considered controversial at the time.

Despite his creative success, Garfein eventually left Hollywood and returned to the world of theater. He founded his own acting school, the Jack Garfein Studio, and continued to teach for several decades. Garfein's methods were praised for their emphasis on physicality and emotional vulnerability, and his legacy lived on through the students he taught.

Garfein's passing marks the end of an era for the Actors Studio and the wider world of acting. His contributions to the art form will never be forgotten, and he will be dearly missed by those who knew him. As James Dean once said of Garfein, "I've had a lot of teachers and directors, but Jack understands me better than anyone else."