One Startling Scene: Tracy Letts in ‘Ford v Ferrari’

Tracy Letts is one of those character actors who rarely gets the recognition he deserves. But in the new movie “Ford v Ferrari,” Letts delivers a performance so powerful, so visceral, that it’s impossible to ignore.

In this true story about the 24 Hours of Le Mans race in 1966, Letts plays Henry Ford II, the billionaire scion of the Ford Motor Company. Ford is a man haunted by his legacy, desperate to prove himself as worthy of his grandfather’s name. He’s a ball of contradictions – both ruthless and vulnerable, angry and emotional – and Letts captures all of it with astonishing depth and detail.

But it’s in one scene, in particular, that Letts truly shines. As Ford sits in a room with his executives, watching a test drive of the new GT40, he’s overcome by the power and speed of the car. “It’s like a jet fighter,” he marvels. “It’s magnificent.” But then, suddenly, he breaks down in tears. “I’m so tired of people telling me what I can’t do,” he sobs. “I just want to win.”

It’s a startling moment, both for the character and the actor. Letts’ face contorts with raw emotion, his body shaking with sobs, as he reveals the vulnerability and insecurity that lie beneath Ford’s hard exterior. It’s a scene that could have been overdone or melodramatic, but Letts plays it with an understated, quietly devastating realism.

It’s also a scene that illuminates the themes of the movie as a whole. “Ford v Ferrari” is a story about the lengths people will go to in order to prove themselves, to achieve greatness, to win. It’s about the sacrifices they make, the risks they take, the relationships they forge and break along the way. And Letts’ performance as Ford encapsulates that struggle perfectly.

Of course, Letts is not the only standout in the movie. Matt Damon and Christian Bale, as the car designer Carroll Shelby and driver Ken Miles, respectively, are both excellent. The racing scenes themselves are heart-pounding and thrilling. But it’s Letts who leaves the greatest impression – who steals the show with his nuanced, complex portrayal of a man who is as powerful as he is broken.

In a year when there are many worthy Oscar contenders, it would be a shame if Letts’ performance were overlooked. He’s an actor who’s been quietly doing great work for years, but “Ford v Ferrari” may be his breakout moment. It’s a performance that will stick with you long after the credits roll – one that’s truly deserving of recognition.