On Monday, it was announced that a new owner has been selected for the nursing home that collapsed in Hollywood, Florida, last year. The collapse resulted in the tragic loss of 12 lives, and sparked a national conversation about the safety of nursing homes across the country.

The new owner, Formation Capital, has agreed to pay $146 million for the facility, which will be rebranded as "The Gardens at Hollywood Hills." The company has pledged to invest additional funds to upgrade the facility and improve safety standards.

The collapse of the nursing home was a devastating tragedy, but it also raised important questions about the quality of care provided by nursing homes across the country. Unfortunately, incidents of neglect and abuse are not uncommon in these facilities, and it's clear that there is a need for significant reform in the industry.

One of the main issues is that many nursing homes are understaffed and underfunded. This can lead to overworked employees, poor quality of care, and unsafe living conditions for residents. In addition, many nursing homes are not held to strict enough standards and are not properly regulated by state and federal authorities.

The new owner of "The Gardens at Hollywood Hills" has the opportunity to set a new standard of excellence for nursing homes across the country. By investing in better staffing, improved training, and updated equipment and facilities, they can create a safe and nurturing environment for residents.

But they can't do it alone. It's up to all of us to demand higher standards for nursing homes and to advocate for better protections for our elderly loved ones. This includes calling on lawmakers to pass stronger regulations and hold nursing homes accountable for their actions.

The tragedy that occurred at the nursing home in Hollywood, Florida, was a wake-up call for the entire country. But with the new ownership of "The Gardens at Hollywood Hills," we have an opportunity to make meaningful change and to ensure that our seniors are treated with the respect and dignity they deserve.