On January 9th, 2020, the world lost a true master of golf course design: Pete Dye.

Pete Dye was widely considered to be the "Picasso" of golf course design, responsible for creating some of the most iconic golf courses in the world, including the TPC at Sawgrass, Whistling Straits, and Harbour Town Golf Links. His courses were known for being challenging, yet beautiful, and always pushing the limits of what was possible in golf course design.

Born on December 29, 1925, in Urbana, Ohio, Dye began his career in golf course design in the early 1960s. Over the next several decades, he would go on to design more than 100 courses around the world, earning numerous accolades and awards along the way.

One of Dye's most famous designs was the TPC at Sawgrass, which he designed in 1980. The course is best known for its iconic 17th hole, a par-3 that requires players to hit their ball over a large water hazard to a small green that is surrounded by bunkers. The hole has become one of the most famous holes in all of golf, and it is considered by many to be Dye's masterpiece.

Dye's influence on the world of golf course design cannot be overstated. He was a pioneer in the field, always pushing the envelope and finding new ways to challenge golfers. He was also known for his attention to detail and his ability to create courses that were not only beautiful but also functional.

In addition to his work on golf courses, Dye was also known for his philanthropy. He and his wife, Alice, donated millions of dollars to various causes over the years, including the Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children and the Indiana University School of Medicine.

Dye's legacy in the world of golf course design will endure for generations to come. His courses will continue to challenge and inspire golfers around the world, and his influence will continue to be felt by designers and architects for years to come.

While it is always sad to say goodbye to such a great talent, we can take comfort in the knowledge that Pete Dye left behind a legacy that will continue to inspire and challenge us for years to come. Rest in peace, Pete Dye.