As the first month of 2020 comes to a close, it's time to take a look at what Governor Andrew Cuomo has in store for the year. The New York Times recently published an article outlining eight key things that Cuomo wants to accomplish in 2020.

1. Legalize Marijuana - Cuomo has been pushing for the legalization of recreational marijuana for some time now. He hopes to make New York the 11th state to legalize the drug.

2. Strengthen Protections for Abortion - With the recent attempts by the Trump administration to restrict access to abortion, Cuomo is looking to reinforce the right to choose in New York.

3. Pass Comprehensive Criminal Justice Reform - Cuomo is seeking to reform the state's criminal justice system, including changes to bail and discovery laws.

4. Increase Funding for Public Education - The Governor wants to invest more funding in public education, including expanding pre-K programs and increasing support for struggling schools.

5. Roll Out Affordable High-Speed Internet Access - Access to high-speed internet can be a major barrier for many New Yorkers, especially in rural areas. Cuomo is looking to make reliable, high-speed internet accessible and affordable for all New Yorkers.

6. Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions - As concerns about climate change continue to mount, Cuomo is aiming to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net-zero by 2050.

7. Boost Efforts to Combat the Opioid Crisis - The opioid epidemic has hit New York hard, and Cuomo is looking to ramp up efforts to combat the crisis, including expanding access to treatment programs.

8. Invest in Infrastructure - New York's infrastructure is in need of repair and investment, and Cuomo hopes to earmark funds to improve everything from highways and bridges to airports and transit systems.

As Cuomo looks to fulfill these goals, there are sure to be challenges and obstacles along the way. However, if he can successfully accomplish even half of the items on this list, it would be a major victory for the people of New York.