The Writers Guild of America (WGA) recently announced their nominations for outstanding screenwriting for the year 2019, and as expected, there were a few of the usual suspects among the nominees. However, there were also a few surprises that will surely have film lovers buzzing with excitement.

Among the nominees for Best Original Screenplay are the hugely popular "Parasite" by Bong Joon-ho, the Netflix-produced "Marriage Story" by Noah Baumbach, and the indie darling "Booksmart" by Emily Halpern, Sarah Haskins, Susanna Fogel, and Katie Silberman. "Knives Out," written by Rian Johnson, and "1917" by Sam Mendes and Krysty Wilson-Cairns also made the cut.

Meanwhile, the nominees for Best Adapted Screenplay include "Joker" by Todd Phillips and Scott Silver, "The Irishman" by Steven Zaillian, "Jojo Rabbit" by Taika Waititi, "Little Women" by Greta Gerwig, and "A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood" by Micah Fitzerman-Blue and Noah Harpster.

While it's not surprising to see critically acclaimed films like "The Irishman" and "Little Women" on the list, the inclusion of "Joker" is an interesting one. The polarizing film has been the talk of the town since its release, and its nod from the WGA only adds fuel to the fire. However, it's worth noting that the film has already picked up a prestigious accolade from the Venice Film Festival earlier this year.

As for television, the nominees for Best Drama Series include "The Crown," "Game of Thrones," "Succession," "The Handmaid's Tale," and "Watchmen." On the other hand, "Barry," "The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel," "Veep," "Pen15," and "Russian Doll" are among the nominees for Best Comedy Series.

It goes without saying that these nominations are a major boon for the writers behind these outstanding works of art. The awards season is only just beginning, and there are sure to be many more surprises in store. But for now, fans of film and television can rest assured that the Writers Guild of America has an excellent crop of nominees to choose from.