The New York Times recently reported on the new HBO series, 'The Outsider,' which brings Stephen King's novel to life on the small screen.

The series promises to bring viewers face-to-face with terror as it explores the story of a small town in Georgia shaken to its core by the murder of a young boy. The primary suspect is quickly apprehended, but as the investigation unfolds, evidence begins to stack up against a man who seems to have an airtight alibi. Enter the outsider: a supernatural force that seems to be at the heart of the crime, and that no one can quite get a handle on.

This is the stuff of Stephen King: a master of horror who has created countless iconic works of fiction that have been adapted for television and film. And while 'The Outsider' may fray a few nerves, it is also a chance to see the famed author in action in the writers' room, collaborating with showrunner Richard Price and director Jason Bateman to bring a new level of visceral horror to the small screen.

The show boasts an all-star cast, including Ben Mendelsohn, who stars as the lead detective, and Cynthia Erivo, who brings her impressive range to the role of an ambitious private investigator hired to help crack the case. The performances are powerful, but it is the sense of unease that permeates every scene that will keep viewers on the edge of their seat.

As The New York Times points out, 'The Outsider' is essentially a crime thriller wrapped up in a supernatural wrapper. The show is driven by a desire to uncover the truth, to solve the crime, but it is also haunted by the specter of the Outsider, a force that seems to be at the center of all the chaos.

This blending of genres, this willingness to take things into the realm of the supernatural, is what makes Stephen King so compelling. His stories are rooted in the real world, but they are always just a step away from something truly terrifying.

With 'The Outsider,' HBO seems to have captured that sense of terror in a way that is both faithful to the source material and yet entirely fresh. It is a chance to see Stephen King at his best, working in close collaboration with a talented team of writers and directors to bring a new level of horror to the small screen.

For fans of Stephen King, 'The Outsider' promises to be a harrowing ride. But for anyone who appreciates quality television, it is also a chance to see one of the most inventive writers of our time at work, bringing his unique brand of terror to life in new and exciting ways.