As advertising has grown increasingly ubiquitous and traditional commercials have become easier and easier to skip or ignore, marketers have been forced to get more creative in how they reach their audience. One growing trend that is gaining attention is the viral non-ad ad – an advertisement that doesn't look like an advertisement and is designed to be shared virally through social media and other online channels.

But is this trend more than just a fad? Some experts believe that the viral non-ad ad is the future of advertising.

One reason for this is the changing way that consumers interact with brands. Today's consumers are more skeptical and less trusting of traditional advertising than ever before. They are also less likely to pay attention to conventional ads, and frequently use ad-blockers to avoid them altogether.

This has created an opportunity for marketers to reach consumers in new ways, and the viral non-ad ad is just one approach. By eschewing overt branding and instead focusing on delivering entertaining or interesting content in a format that is easily shareable, these ads can generate buzz without feeling like a hard sell.

Some examples of viral non-ad ads that have gained traction in recent years include classic campaigns like Old Spice's "The Man Your Man Could Smell Like" and Dove's "Real Beauty Sketches", as well as more recent inclusions like Squarespace's "Gone Squatchin’" and Apple's "Welcome Home".

Critics of the viral non-ad ad approach argue that it is difficult to measure the success or ROI of such campaigns. With no clear-cut way to track user engagement or conversion, brands could be left in the lurch if their campaign doesn't go viral or doesn't translate to sales.

However, proponents of the approach say that the brand lift and name recognition generated by a successful viral campaign can more than make up for any initial investment, and that by creating ongoing relationships with consumers based on trust and authenticity, a brand can build long-term loyalty and advocacy.

Ultimately, only time will tell whether the viral non-ad ad is the future of advertising or a passing fad. But with today's digital consumers hungry for content that is engaging, shareable, and authentic, the approach certainly seems to hold significant promise.