As tensions between the United States and Iran continue to rise following the death of Iranian general Qassem Suleimani, many are left wondering why the U.S. decided to carry out the strike.

On January 3rd, 2020, the U.S. launched an airstrike in Baghdad, killing Suleimani, a top Iranian military figure who was considered by many to be the second most powerful person in Iran. The strike was authorized by President Donald Trump, who claimed that Suleimani was planning attacks against American personnel and interests.

However, critics argue that the attack was not justified and may have actually escalated tensions with Iran. Many have questioned the legality of the strike, as it was carried out without congressional authorization and against a sovereign nation.

The U.S. has a long history of conflict with Iran, and tensions have been mounting for some time. In recent years, Iran has been accused of supporting terrorist groups and seeking to develop nuclear weapons. As a result, the U.S. has imposed economic sanctions on Iran, which has resulted in a strained relationship between the two countries.

The death of Suleimani, however, may have been a turning point in this conflict. Iran has vowed retaliation and has already launched missile strikes against U.S. military bases in Iraq. The situation is volatile and unpredictable, and many fear that it could spiral out of control.

Critics argue that the U.S. should have pursued diplomatic measures instead of carrying out a military strike. Diplomacy could have potentially led to a resolution of the conflict and prevented further escalation.

However, supporters of the strike argue that Suleimani was a dangerous figure who posed a threat to American interests. They argue that the U.S. needed to take action to protect its personnel and interests in the Middle East.

Overall, the decision to kill Suleimani is a controversial one with far-reaching consequences. It remains to be seen how this conflict will play out and what its ultimate impact will be on U.S.-Iran relations.