As the world woke up to a new day, there were several major news events yesterday that grabbed headlines. The situation in Iran, the tragic crash of a Boeing 737, and the latest developments in the ongoing saga of automotive executive Carlos Ghosn are just a few of the major news stories that dominated the day.

Iran took center stage once again, as tensions continue to escalate between the country and the United States. Yesterday, Iran announced that it was enacting its second phase of its withdrawal from the JCPOA, the nuclear deal it struck with several major countries in 2015. This latest move by Iran is seen as a response to the killing of General Qasem Soleimani, a top Iranian military leader, by the U.S. last week.

In other news, a tragic plane crash occurred in Iran, killing all 176 people on board. The crash involved a Boeing 737-800 operated by Ukraine International Airlines. The cause of the crash is still unknown, but early reports suggest that it may have been the result of a mechanical failure. As investigations into the cause of the crash continue, the world mourns the loss of the lives that were taken far too soon.

The ongoing saga of Carlos Ghosn also made headlines yesterday, as he made his first public appearance since his dramatic escape from house arrest in Japan. Ghosn, the former CEO of Nissan Motor Co., was arrested in Japan in 2018 on charges of financial misconduct. He was held in custody for months before being released on bail and placed under house arrest. Recently, he escaped from Japan and made his way to Lebanon. In his public appearance yesterday, Ghosn accused Nissan and Japanese prosecutors of colluding against him and insisted that he is innocent of the charges against him.

All of these stories are complex and important, and they remind us that the world is a constantly shifting place. It is essential that we stay informed about events like these, as they have far-reaching implications for our lives and our world. As we move forward into the rest of the week, it will be interesting to see how these stories continue to develop and what new developments may emerge.