The 2018 Golden Globes was not just another glamorous red carpet event for Hollywood stars. It was a statement. It was a moment where celebrities came together to take a stand against sexual harassment in the industry and to show support for the #MeToo and Time's Up movements.

In previous years, the red carpet was dominated by Harvey Weinstein's presence. The disgraced Hollywood producer, who has been accused by dozens of women of sexual harassment and assault, used to be a regular on the red carpet, boasting his power and influence in the industry.

But this year, the red carpet was not Harvey Weinstein's red carpet. He was nowhere to be seen, and in his absence, something powerful happened. The celebrities took the opportunity to use their platform to speak out against sexual harassment and to show solidarity with the victims.

Actresses like Meryl Streep, Emma Stone, and Reese Witherspoon wore black dresses as a symbolic gesture of support for the movement. They also brought activists as their guests to the event to give them the opportunity to speak out and raise awareness about the cause.

The speeches made by Oprah Winfrey and other celebrities at the event were impactful and emotional. Oprah, who received the Cecil B. DeMille Award, gave a moving speech in which she spoke about the importance of the movement and the need for change.

"For too long, women have not been heard or believed if they dared to speak their truth to the power of those men. But their time is up. Their time is up!" Oprah exclaimed, eliciting a standing ovation from the audience.

The 2018 Golden Globes red carpet has shown that Hollywood is ready for change. This year's event was not just about glitz and glamour, but about using the power of the platform to raise awareness and make a difference.

It is clear that the industry is slowly but surely moving towards a new era where sexual harassment will not be tolerated, and women (and men) will feel safe to speak up and make a change. The Golden Globes red carpet was just the beginning. We can only hope that this attitude and momentum will continue throughout the year and beyond.