Opinion | North Korea Is Not Done Trolling Trump

North Korea's recent snubs to the United States, including its unwillingness to meet with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and its testing of short-range missiles, signaling its displeasure with the stalled nuclear talks. But are these actions just another round of North Korea's trolling of President Trump, or is there something more serious going on?

It's clear that North Korea has become quite adept at trolling the United States, and particularly President Trump. The North has repeatedly issued statements and made statements that could be seen as provocations or insults towards the president, from testing missiles to calling him a "dotard." This has likely been an effective tactic for North Korea, as it seems to have allowed them to gain some leverage in negotiations with the U.S.

But there may be more to North Korea's recent actions than mere trolling. The country is facing serious economic sanctions that have had a significant impact on their ability to trade and conduct business. The failure to get relief from these sanctions could have dire consequences for North Korea's economy and the stability of the regime.

North Korea's snubs to the U.S. and the recent missile tests may be signaling the regime's frustration with the lack of progress in negotiations. Their actions could be their way of sending a message that they're not willing to back down easily, particularly without any tangible concessions from the U.S.

President Trump's reaction to these provocations will be telling. If he takes the bait and responds with a strong reaction or makes any concessions to North Korea, it could embolden the country to further push their luck. On the other hand, if the U.S. responds with a calm, measured approach, it could set the stage for more productive negotiations in the future.

Ultimately, it's too soon to know whether North Korea is just trolling the United States or if there's something more serious going on. But it's important to keep in mind that these actions could be a signal of greater tensions between the two countries, and should not be dismissed as mere bluster. The stakes are too high to take North Korea's actions lightly.