In a surprising move, a member of the Kennedy family has announced that they will be running against Jeff Van Drew, a Democratic Representative who defected to the Republican party last year, in the upcoming congressional election in New Jersey.

Amy Kennedy, a former schoolteacher and mental health advocate, is the wife of former Rhode Island Representative Patrick J. Kennedy, and a member of one of America's most famous political dynasties. She recently announced her candidacy in the Democratic primary in New Jersey's 2nd Congressional District, which has been represented by Van Drew since 2019.

Van Drew made headlines in 2019 when he announced his decision to switch parties and vote against impeaching President Trump. Since then, he has continued to support the President's policies and has been a vocal critic of his former party.

Kennedy, on the other hand, is running as a progressive Democrat who is committed to fighting for issues like healthcare reform, gun safety, and climate change. She has already received endorsements from several prominent Democrats, including former Vice President Al Gore and New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy.

The race between Kennedy and Van Drew is shaping up to be a closely watched one, as many see it as a test of the Democratic party's ability to win back voters who have defected to the Republicans in recent years. The 2nd Congressional District has traditionally been a Republican stronghold, but was won by Democrats in the 2018 midterm elections.

If Kennedy is successful in the primary and goes on to defeat Van Drew in the general election, it would be a significant victory for Democrats, and a sign that their efforts to win back disillusioned voters are paying off.

However, it will not be an easy fight. Van Drew is a seasoned politician who has won several elections in the past, and his switch to the Republican party has won him support from many conservative voters. Kennedy will need to mobilize a coalition of progressive Democrats, moderate independents, and disillusioned former Republicans if she hopes to win.

Regardless of the outcome, the decision by a member of the Kennedy family to enter the race is a sign that the race in New Jersey's 2nd Congressional District will be one of the most closely watched in the country this year.