Legendary filmmaker, Martin Scorsese, known for his masterpieces such as Goodfellas, Taxi Driver, and Raging Bull has come to a realization that he can no longer hold onto the past. In an interview with The New York Times, Scorsese opened up about his latest project, The Irishman, and how it marked a turning point in his career.

The Irishman, starring Robert De Niro, Al Pacino, and Joe Pesci, is a gangster epic that spans several decades. It's also the first time Scorsese has used de-ageing technology to tell a story about aging gangsters. This technology allowed the actors to play their younger selves and then gradually age throughout the film. While the movie received critical acclaim and even received an Oscar nomination, Scorsese admits that it was a difficult project.

Scorsese revealed that making The Irishman made him realize that he has to let go of certain things. "You can't hold onto the past," he told The New York Times. "I thought I could. But you can't. It's gone."

The filmmaker, who will turn 79 this year, admitted that he never imagined himself getting older. He always thought he would be young and full of energy forever. But seeing his friends and family members pass away, he realized that time waits for no one.

Another pivotal moment for Scorsese was when he began to see his own mortality. "You start to feel a sense of urgency," he said. "You realize that you're not going to be here forever, and there are certain things that you want to accomplish before you go."

Scorsese says that he's now focused on making the most of the time he has left. "I want to do good work," he said. "I want to make films that have meaning and that will last. I want to tell stories that matter."

For Scorsese, "letting go" doesn't mean retiring. In fact, he has several projects in the works, including a documentary about Bob Dylan and another movie called Killers of the Flower Moon, which will star Leonardo DiCaprio and Robert De Niro.

As Scorsese approaches his 80s, he's embracing new technology and new ways of telling stories. He's no longer holding onto the past and is instead looking towards the future. "I don't want to be the old man that's saying, 'I remember when...' I want to be the old man that's looking forward, that's excited about what's next."

With his talent and experience, it's clear that Martin Scorsese has a lot left to offer. He may be letting go of his past, but his future is looking brighter than ever.