There's an accepted notion that as we get older, our memory begins to deteriorate. But new studies suggest that aging doesn't necessarily equate to forgetfulness. In fact, our brains may continue to function just as well as they always have, if not better, as we move into our later years. 

The studies that have come out in recent years provide evidence that just because we're aging, it doesn't mean our memory is automatically doomed. Some research has even pointed to an increase in certain types of cognitive functions like vocabulary and a tendency to view life with more positive feelings. 

It's important to understand that the aging brain is subject to the same level of variation as the brain of a younger person. Just like no two individuals are alike, the same goes for our neurological make-up. This means that while some people may experience a decline in their cognitive functions, there are others who will continue to function at elite levels right throughout their later years. 

As we age, we do encounter some changes to our brain. One major change is a decrease in the rate of growth of new neurons in the brain. This is coupled with decline in the ability to form new connections between neurons. This is not necessarily a cause for alarm, as it does not necessarily result in an overall decrease in cognitive ability. 

It's also worth noting that changes in lifestyle can have a significant impact on our cognitive functions as we get older. Exercise, for example, is one of the most important things we can do for our brain health as we age. Getting enough sleep, eating a healthy diet and staying engaged socially are also essential elements we should all contemplate as we advance in years. 

In summary, the notion that our memory necessarily fails as we age is an antiquated belief that has been overthrown by recent research. Certain functions may begin to decline slightly, but overall, the majority of people will continue to function normally throughout their entire lives. The most important thing is to remain active both physically and mentally, and to continuously challenge those cognitive functions in order to keep them sharp.