The United States has been waging war in Iraq for nearly two decades. With the rise and fall of multiple leaders in the region, the U.S. has been slowly extricating themselves from the political and military turmoil that has been plaguing the country. However, in January 2020, the U.S. seemed ready to leave Iraq altogether. But, as it turns out, it was all an "honest mistake."

In response to a United States drone strike that killed a top Iranian general, Iran responded with missile strikes against two American bases in Iraq. The retaliation set off a wave of anti-American protests throughout Iraq and resulted in the Iraqi Parliament passing a nonbinding resolution calling for the withdrawal of U.S. troops.

In response, the U.S. began to prepare for a full-scale withdrawal from the region. However, a letter from the head of U.S. Central Command, General Kenneth McKenzie, informed the Iraqi military that the U.S. would be withdrawing its troops after a “repositioning of forces in the coming days and weeks.”

For many, the letter was received as a confirmation that after nearly two decades, the U.S. was finally leaving Iraq. However, the truth turned out to be less absolute.

According to the New York Times, it was all a miscommunication. U.S. Defense Secretary Mark Esper stated that there were no immediate plans to withdraw U.S. troops from Iraq following the Iranian missile strikes. He said that the letter sent to Iraq had been “poorly worded” and that it conveyed a message that was different from what was intended.

This honest mistake has thrown U.S. policy in Iraq into turmoil. The U.S. is still in the midst of a low-grade conflict with Iran and many Americans are beginning to ask themselves if the cost of staying in Iraq is worth it. The incident highlights the need for clear communication and the importance of a coherent messaging strategy.

For the Iraqi people, the realization that the U.S. is not leaving anytime soon is likely to be met with disappointment. They have lived through two decades of foreign occupation and are looking for their leaders to provide a way forward.

In conclusion, the U.S. needs to make a decision regarding its ongoing presence in Iraq. The events of January 2020 highlight the difficulties associated with disentangling from the region. Clarity is key and miscommunication can have unintended consequences. The people of Iraq deserve a stable and secure future, and the U.S. must decide whether it is in their best interest to help shape it.