Competing for Sanders’s New Hampshire Voters: Yang and Gabbard

As the race for the Democratic presidential nomination heats up, candidates are jostling for position in the critical state of New Hampshire. Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders won the state in 2016 by a large margin, but with new contenders emerging, the race for his supporters is heating up.

Two candidates, Andrew Yang and Tulsi Gabbard, have emerged as potential options for Sanders supporters. Both candidates have drawn on his message of economic justice and the need for structural change. Yang, a former tech entrepreneur, is pursuing a “human-centered capitalism” approach, echoing Sanders’s focus on inequality and the need for a more just economy. He also shares Sanders’s view that the political system is rigged against ordinary Americans.

Gabbard, a U.S. Representative from Hawaii, has drawn on Sanders’s anti-war stance, calling for an end to American interventionism and a more restrained foreign policy. She also shares Sanders’s focus on income inequality and has proposed measures such as a $15 minimum wage and free community college.

Both Yang and Gabbard have struggled to gain traction in the race so far, facing challenges such as low polling numbers and lack of media attention. But in Sanders’s home state of New Hampshire, where his message has resonated strongly, they may have a better chance of winning over his base.

Sanders himself has not yet endorsed a candidate, but both Yang and Gabbard have received positive attention from his allies. Progressive group Our Revolution endorsed Gabbard, calling her “a strong progressive voice in Congress.” Yang has also drawn positive attention from Sanders supporters, with his message of a basic income for all Americans resonating with many on the left.

As the race heats up in New Hampshire, both Yang and Gabbard will be looking to gain momentum and win over Sanders’s supporters. With their focus on economic inequality and the need for sweeping structural change, they may be able to tap into the enthusiasm that propelled Sanders to victory in 2016. Whether they can translate that support into a successful campaign remains to be seen, but their message is likely to continue to resonate with many on the left who are hungry for change.