On December 31, 2019, a violent siege of the United States embassy in Baghdad shook the world. Militia members and supporters of an Iranian-backed group stormed the embassy compound after days of ongoing protests against U.S. airstrikes in Iraq, resulting in damage to the embassy's infrastructure and forcing the U.S. military to send reinforcements to secure the area.

Following this attack, the United States government has announced that it is prepared to take pre-emptive action against the militias responsible for the embassy attack. The U.S. administration has identified Kataib Hezbollah, a Shiite militia group reportedly backed by Iran, as the primary instigator of the assault on the U.S. embassy.

U.S. Defense Secretary Mark Esper has stated that the U.S. will not tolerate attacks on American personnel and facilities in Iraq, and that “any attacks against Americans will be met with a decisive response." In particular, Esper has authorized the deployment of an additional 750 soldiers to the region, as well as the deployment of a rapid-reaction force capable of responding to potential attacks on U.S. assets in Iraq.

The U.S. military has already taken some steps to strike back against Kataib Hezbollah. In late December, U.S. airstrikes targeted several of the group's bases in Iraq, killing at least 25 militia members and prompting retaliation from the group in the form of rocket attacks against U.S. military installations in Iraq.

While the U.S. is prepared to escalate its military response to potential attacks in Iraq, some experts have warned of the risk of further violence and destabilization of the region. The tensions between Iran and the U.S., which have been high in the wake of the U.S. withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal and the subsequent imposition of economic sanctions, could spiral out of control if the U.S. takes more aggressive action against Iranian-backed groups in Iraq.

Moreover, there is the potential for even greater risk if the U.S. and Iran move beyond indirect conflict in Iraq and directly engage in military aggression. This could have significant ramifications throughout the Middle East and beyond, potentially leading to a wider regional conflict.

As the U.S. prepares for potential pre-emptive strikes against militias in Iraq, it will have to carefully consider the consequences of these actions and the risks associated with further escalation. The safety of American personnel and facilities in Iraq must be maintained, but this objective must be balanced against the dangers of further destabilization and conflict in what is already a volatile region.