Crime Sprees, Both Creepy and Comic

Crime is a scourge on society, but that doesn't mean all crime sprees are created equal. Some are dark and disturbing, while others border on being comical. The New York Times takes a look at two recent crime sprees in New York City that fall on either end of this spectrum.

The Creepy: The Phantom of the Subway

For months, commuters on the New York City subway have been haunted by the "Phantom of the Subway." This mysterious figure has been sneaking up behind unsuspecting passengers and playing the theremin, an electronic musical instrument that emits otherworldly sounds.

The Phantom's modus operandi is simple: He appears out of nowhere and begins playing his theremin, causing people to jump and then stare in disbelief. He disappears just as quickly as he arrives, leaving behind confused and slightly disturbed commuters.

New York City police have been trying to catch the Phantom for weeks, but he seems to be one step ahead of them at all times. Some commuters have even taken to social media to plead with the Phantom to reveal himself and explain his strange behavior.

The Comic: The Caper of the Missing Pizza

On the lighter side of the crime spree spectrum is the "Caper of the Missing Pizza." This caper began when a pizza delivery person was robbed of his cash and pies by a group of young men. However, the criminals' plans were foiled when they realized that they had made off with a pineapple pizza.

The robbers apparently didn't like pineapple on their pizza and promptly abandoned the pies in a nearby park. This led to a hilarious scene where park-goers were able to enjoy free slices of pizza, much to the delight of social media.

The police eventually caught up with the robbers and were able to recover the stolen cash, but the missing pizza was never found.

While crime is no laughing matter, these two crime sprees offer a glimpse into the weird and wonderful world of New York City. From the creepy Phantom of the Subway to the comical missing pizza caper, it's clear that anything can happen in the city that never sleeps.