In a sudden move, the White House has notified Congress of the Suleimani strike under the War Powers Act. This notification came two days after the controversial drone strike that killed Iranian General Qasem Suleimani, who was the mastermind behind Iran's extensive military and intelligence activity throughout the Middle East.

The War Powers Act was first passed in 1973, in response to the Vietnam War, with the objective of limiting the president's ability to involve the military in foreign conflicts without the approval of the legislative branch of government.

The notification sent to Congress is seen by some as an attempt by the White House to justify the Suleimani strike under the War Powers Act. However, others argue that the notification is more of a procedural formality and does not represent a genuine attempt at congressional authorization of the strike.

The escalation of tensions between the US and Iran has caused concern among many congressional members, with many democrats and some republicans questioning the lack of transparency on the part of the Trump administration in terms of intelligence behind the decision to launch the drone strike. The White House's notification is unlikely to satisfy many of these members, with some calling for further investigation.

Aside from the domestic political ramifications of the notification, the move is also likely to have international consequences. Iran has already vowed to retaliate for the killing of Suleimani, and the US has increased its military presence in the region. The notification sends a message to friends and foes alike that the US is ready to take strong action in response to perceived threats.

Whether or not the notification will lead to further congressional action remains to be seen. The Trump administration has been criticized for an inconsistent approach to congressional consultation and has been known to bypass the legislative process in several instances.

Overall, this notification represents the latest chapter in the ongoing tensions between the US and Iran. It remains to be seen whether the White House's move will be viewed as an attempt to respect the War Powers Act or merely an empty gesture to appease concerned members of Congress. However, one thing is clear: the Suleimani strike has pushed the US closer to the brink of military conflict in the Middle East, and the consequences of that strike are likely to shape US foreign policy for years to come.