For months now, tension between the United States and Iran has been growing. The two countries have been exchanging threats and attacks, with the most significant event being the U.S. drone strike that killed Iranian military commander Qasem Soleimani in January. Despite this, the global oil markets have not seen a significant spike in prices. While some analysts are puzzled by this apparent lag, there are several reasons why oil prices are slow to reflect U.S.-Iran tensions.

Firstly, the world is currently experiencing an oversupply of oil. Before the pandemic, the world was producing much more oil than it needed, which kept prices low. The COVID-19 pandemic has only exacerbated this situation. With the global economy in recession, demand for oil has plummeted. As of June 2020, demand for oil had fallen by about 10 million barrels per day. This decline in demand has kept prices low, even as tensions between the United States and Iran escalate.

Secondly, the United States has become a net exporter of oil in recent years. In fact, the United States has become the world's largest oil producer, thanks to the shale oil boom. As a result, the United States is less vulnerable to supply disruptions than it was in the past. Whereas in the past Iran's threats to block the Strait of Hormuz may have caused prices to spike, today the United States has less reason to worry. In addition, U.S. oil exports have been increasing rapidly, meaning that other countries can stockpile U.S. oil to offset any disruption to their supplies.

Thirdly, the global oil market is increasingly influenced by other factors, such as OPEC's decisions about production levels. OPEC, or the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, is a group of countries that produce about 44% of the world's oil. OPEC has had a significant impact on oil prices in the past, particularly when it comes to "managing" the market by controlling supply. In recent years, OPEC has entered into agreements with other producers, such as Russia, to limit production in order to prop up prices. OPEC's decisions about production levels can therefore have a more significant impact on oil prices than any specific geopolitical event.

Of course, this is not to say that U.S.-Iran tensions do not matter. Any conflict between two major oil producers could have an impact on global oil prices, particularly if it lasts for an extended period of time. However, today's oversupply of oil and the United States' increased role in the global oil market mean that the impact of U.S.-Iran tensions on oil prices may not be as immediate or severe as some might expect. Instead, other factors such as the pandemic and OPEC's decisions will be the primary drivers of oil prices going forward.