Peter Kirstein, a computer scientist who played a significant role in the development of the internet in Europe, passed away on June 8 at the age of 86. He was known as the father of the European Internet due to his pioneering work in establishing Europe's first computer network, which ultimately led to the creation of the internet as we know it today.

Kirstein was born in Germany in 1933 and moved to the United Kingdom with his family in 1937. He studied mathematics and physics at the University of London and later earned a Ph.D. in computer science from the same institution in 1964. His groundbreaking work in computer science began in the 1960s, when he started creating computer networks between different universities in the United Kingdom.

In the 1970s, Kirstein turned his attention to creating a computer network that could connect researchers and scientists across Europe. He was instrumental in the establishment of the European Academic and Research Network (EARN), which connected universities and research centers in Europe for the first time. EARN eventually became the backbone of the global computer network that we now know as the internet.

Kirstein's work in networking was not limited to Europe. He also played a key role in helping to establish the first internet connections between Europe and the United States. In 1973, he collaborated with colleagues in the US to connect EARN to the ARPANET, the precursor to the modern internet.

Kirstein's contributions to the development of the internet were widely recognized by his colleagues in the field. He was awarded the Queen's Birthday Honours award in 1996 for his services to the development of computer networking in the UK. He was also awarded the Postel Award in 2009, which recognizes individuals who have made significant contributions to the development of the internet.

One of Kirstein's most enduring legacies is the establishment of the concept of a "network of networks," which underpins the way the internet operates today. This model of distributed networking means that the internet can survive even if parts of it go down, as information can be re-routed through different networks.

In the wake of Kirstein's passing, many of his colleagues and admirers took to social media to pay tribute to his contributions to the development of the internet. The extent of his influence on the way we live and work today cannot be overstated. Peter Kirstein truly was a pioneer in the field of computer networking and his legacy will continue to be felt for many years to come.