In recent years, many Democratic lawmakers have been pushing an aggressive environmental agenda in Congress. With the Democratic Party now in control of the House of Representatives, these efforts have only intensified.

However, despite their best efforts, House Democrats have found it difficult to achieve significant victories in the face of opposition from the Republican-controlled Senate and the Trump administration. While the House has passed a number of environmental bills, few of them have made it into law.

One piece of legislation that has gained traction is the Climate Action Now Act, which seeks to prevent the Trump administration from pulling out of the Paris climate agreement. This bill was passed by the House in May of 2019, but stalled in the Senate and has yet to be signed by the President.

Other environmental bills that have been passed by the House include the Arctic Cultural and Coastal Plain Protection Act, which aims to prevent drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and the Save the Internet Act, which seeks to roll back the repeal of net neutrality regulations.

Despite these successes, environmental activists are frustrated by the lack of progress in Congress. Many argue that the Democratic Party has not done enough to make the environment a centerpiece of their platform, and that they should be doing more to push for bolder action.

However, some lawmakers argue that incremental progress is better than no progress at all. Representative Deb Haaland of New Mexico, one of the first Native American women elected to Congress, has been a vocal advocate for environmental protection. While she acknowledges that progress has been slow, she remains optimistic about the future. "We're going to keep pushing," she says. "We have to keep pushing."

Ultimately, the fate of environmental legislation in Congress will depend on the outcome of the 2020 presidential election. If Democrats can take control of the Senate and the White House, they will have a much better chance of enacting meaningful environmental protections. Until then, however, victories will be few and far between.