Anna Netrebko, Consider New Opera. Please.
- The New York Times

Anna Netrebko is an internationally acclaimed soprano with a voice that can only be described as exquisite. Her performances have garnered her worldwide recognition, including appearances at the Metropolitan Opera, Royal Opera House, and the Vienna State Opera. However, as much as one can admire her talent and vocal prowess, there is one recurring criticism that has made its way through the opera community. The need for Netrebko to broaden her repertoire and consider taking up newer opera.

It is not that Netrebko has not had an impressive career so far. She has sung roles in some of the most recognized operas, including Rusalka, La bohème, and Don Giovanni, among many others. Her performances have been electrifying, and her vocal range and control are unparalleled. However, Netrebko has predominantly performed works by composers such as Mozart, Verdi, and Puccini, often relying on the same repertoire that made her famous. In the eyes of some critics and audiences, this has come at the expense of embracing new opera and the creative challenge it presents.

It is not uncommon for established opera performers to stay within an area of comfort and perform the roles they know best. After all, there are only so many hours in a day, and the life of an opera singer is rigorous and challenging. However, the world of opera is ever-evolving, and different works from new composers are being premiered every year.

By taking on more modern productions, Netrebko would be able to showcase her vocal adaptability and versatility as an artist. Her decision would also bring benefits to the industry, including showing audiences that new opera can be just as exciting and enjoyable as more well-known works. It would also give up-and-coming composers the opportunity to have their work performed and gain visibility outside of contemporary classical music circles.

In conclusion, Anna Netrebko's performances have made her a household name in the world of opera. Her talent and voice are undeniable. However, as much as it is understandable for an artist to stick to what they know, embracing new opera would be a significant contribution to the art form while showcasing her vocal range and adaptability to a new generation. Opera audiences are not only looking for skilled performers, but they are also seeking innovative and new works that challenge their perceptions of the art form. Hopefully, Netrebko takes up the challenge to deepen her repertoire and inspire audiences to view opera in new ways.