Opinion | Subpoena John Bolton – The New York Times

As the impeachment inquiry continues into President Trump’s alleged abuse of power with regard to Ukraine, the House Intelligence Committee is considering whether to subpoena former national security adviser John Bolton to testify.

It’s not a decision to be made lightly. A subpoena would require Bolton to appear before the committee and answer questions under oath. He might reveal new information that could be damaging to the president. He might also refuse to testify or assert executive privilege, triggering a legal fight that could delay and complicate the impeachment process.

But given Bolton’s key role in the administration’s Ukraine policy, as well as his reputation as a hard-line conservative who has clashed with Trump on some foreign policy issues, it’s hard to imagine that the committee could conduct a thorough investigation without hearing from him.

Bolton’s deputy Fiona Hill, who testified last week, described him as deeply skeptical of Trump’s policy toward Ukraine and the role of the president’s personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, in promoting investigations of former Vice President Joe Biden and his son. She also said that Bolton had instructed her to report a conversation she had with Ambassador Gordon Sondland, in which Sondland suggested that Trump might be willing to release military aid to Ukraine if the government there announced an investigation into a Ukrainian energy company on whose board Hunter Biden sat.

Bolton has not yet agreed to testify voluntarily, but has signaled that he would comply with a subpoena if issued. His lawyer has also suggested that he has relevant information about the Ukraine affair.

If Bolton does testify, it could be explosive. He is known for his hawkish views on Russia and Ukraine, and has been a vocal critic of Trump’s efforts to cozy up to Russian President Vladimir Putin. He may have objections to the way that the president has handled Ukraine policy, both in terms of the Biden investigation and the decision to withhold military aid from Ukraine.

Of course, there is also a chance that Bolton’s testimony could ultimately vindicate Trump. Perhaps he will testify that he was troubled by the president’s Ukraine policy, but ultimately concluded that it was legal and appropriate. Perhaps he will defend Trump’s actions as consistent with his broader foreign policy goals.

But that’s precisely why the committee needs to hear from him. The impeachment inquiry is considering whether the president abused his power for personal gain, and whether he obstructed Congress by withholding documents and testimony. Bolton is a key figure in that story, and his testimony could shed new light on both questions.

If the committee concludes that a subpoena is necessary, it should issue one without delay. The fact that Bolton is willing to testify, coupled with his apparent eagerness to clear his name and defend his reputation, suggests that he may have information that is both relevant and credible. The American people deserve to know what that information is.