The death of Major General Qassim Suleimani has sparked a new level of tension between the United States and Iran. The airstrike ordered by President Trump has been praised by some for taking out a dangerous terrorist, while others have criticized the action as potentially leading to a wider conflict in the Middle East. However, one thing is certain: the Iran nuclear deal is now in more jeopardy than ever before.

The Iran nuclear deal, officially known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), was signed in 2015 between Iran and six major world powers: the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Russia, and China. The deal aimed to limit Iran’s nuclear activities in exchange for the lifting of economic sanctions. The JCPOA was hailed as a major achievement in international diplomacy, but it has been a point of contention ever since President Trump announced the United States’ withdrawal from the agreement in May 2018.

Iran has been largely compliant with the terms of the JCPOA since the United States’ withdrawal, but the situation has become more complicated with the killing of General Suleimani. In response to the airstrike, Iran announced that it would no longer abide by the limits on uranium enrichment set out in the JCPOA. The move is largely symbolic, as Iran has not yet resumed its nuclear program, but it is a clear sign that Iran may not continue to hold up its end of the bargain if the nuclear deal is not re-established.

The United States’ withdrawal from the JCPOA was a major blow to the agreement, but there were hopes that the other countries who signed on to the deal could salvage it. European leaders have been working to find ways to fulfill the deal’s promises to Iran despite U.S. economic sanctions, but this has been made more difficult by Iran’s recent actions. If Iran continues to breach the terms of the JCPOA, it may be hard for the other countries to maintain their commitment to the deal.

The situation is further complicated by the upcoming U.S. presidential election. President Trump has been a vocal opponent of the JCPOA, and his administration’s withdrawal from the agreement was a major policy shift. If President Trump is re-elected in 2020, it is unlikely that the United States will rejoin the JCPOA or negotiate a new agreement. However, if a Democratic candidate wins the election, there is the possibility that the United States could reenter the JCPOA or negotiate a different agreement.

The death of General Suleimani has rekindled tensions between the United States and Iran, and it may have dealt a fatal blow to the JCPOA. It remains to be seen how the other countries who signed onto the deal will respond to Iran’s recent actions, and whether the United States will have a new president who is interested in reentering the agreement. For now, the future of the JCPOA is uncertain, but it is clear that the stakes are high for both Iran and the international community.