In a controversial move that is sure to raise concerns among many Venezuelans, President Nicolas Maduro has claimed control of the country's national assembly, tightening his grip on power. Maduro's move came after his supporters won a majority of the seats in a recent election, which many opposition officials have denounced as fraudulent. 

The move by Maduro to take control of the national assembly is the latest in a series of steps he has taken to consolidate his power over the South American nation. Over the past few years, Maduro has consolidated his control over the judiciary and the armed forces, and has cracked down on journalists and opposition activists in an effort to silence dissent. 

The move comes as Venezuela faces a deepening economic crisis, with inflation spiraling out of control and basic goods becoming increasingly scarce. Many Venezuelans blame Maduro for the crisis, and mass protests against his government have become a regular occurrence in recent years. 

Opposition leaders have condemned Maduro's move to claim control of the national assembly, with many describing it as a coup. However, Maduro has defended his action, saying that it is necessary to restore stability and order to the country. 

The move is likely to further deepen the divide within Venezuela, with many opposition supporters viewing it as a blatant power grab by a government that has lost its legitimacy. There are fears that the move will also spark a new wave of protests and violence in the country, which has already seen its fair share of political turmoil in recent years. 

The international community has also condemned Maduro's move, with the United States and several other countries announcing that they will not recognize the outcome of the recent election. The Organization of American States (OAS) has also spoken out against Maduro's actions, saying that they violate basic democratic principles. 

As tensions continue to simmer in Venezuela, many are bracing themselves for what could be a long and difficult struggle for the soul of the country. The move by Maduro to claim control of the national assembly is just the latest in a series of steps he has taken to cement his grip on power, but it remains to be seen whether he will be able to succeed in his efforts to stifle dissent and maintain his hold on the country.