The day has finally come. Pete Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Indiana, who captivated the nation during his presidential run, has officially stepped down from his post as mayor. But it’s not all sad news; his successor has been sworn in, and he’s ready to take the reins.

James Mueller, 38, was sworn in on New Year’s Day to become South Bend’s new mayor. Mueller had been serving as Buttigieg’s chief of staff before being elected to the position in November 2019.

Mueller, who grew up in South Bend and previously worked for the consulting firm McKinsey & Company, ran on a platform of economic growth and improving city services. He highlighted his experience working on projects to revitalize blighted neighborhoods and attract businesses.

Now, as he takes over as mayor, Mueller faces some big challenges. South Bend is a city with a poverty rate of 25%, according to U.S. Census data. The city also faces issues of racial inequality and a high crime rate.

Mueller has said that he plans to prioritize economic development and job creation, and has established an economic development committee to help achieve these goals. He’s also pledged to work on issues related to affordable housing, infrastructure, and public safety.

But Mueller’s biggest test may be following in the footsteps of Buttigieg, who gained national attention during his presidential run and was seen as a rising star in the Democratic Party.

Buttigieg, who was the first openly gay man to launch a major presidential campaign, had a lot of accomplishments during his eight years as mayor of South Bend. He created more than 1,000 jobs and oversaw the revitalization of several neighborhoods.

But he’s perhaps best known for his handling of a controversy in 2012, when he came out as gay in the middle of his re-election campaign. He went on to win the race with 80% of the vote.

Buttigieg’s national profile and success as mayor have earned him plenty of attention and accolades. He was named one of the “100 most influential people in the world” by Time magazine in 2019, and his memoir was a New York Times bestseller.

But now, as he prepares to step down and turn over the reins to Mueller, Buttigieg says he’s confident that the city of South Bend is in good hands. He’s planning to take some time off to explore his options, and has said that he’s open to running for office again in the future.

As for Mueller, he’s ready to take on the challenge of leading South Bend into the future. “We’re ready to work, we’re ready to make progress, and we’re ready to create opportunities for everyone in the community,” he said in his inaugural address.

Only time will tell if Mueller can continue the legacy of success that his predecessor started, but he’s off to a good start. With a clear vision for the city and a willingness to work hard, he just might be able to make South Bend an even better place to live, work, and play.