The tech industry has long been riddled with controversies, and Alphabet is now in the spotlight as their Chief Legal Officer, David Drummond, has announced his resignation amid an investigation into his professional conduct.

Drummond, who has been with the company since its inception, was also a member of its board of directors, making his departure all the more significant. The investigation into his conduct began last year after a former Google employee made public allegations of Drummond's inappropriate relationships with subordinates.

According to The New York Times, the company found that Drummond had been involved in multiple relationships with subordinates in his department, as well as with extramarital partners. While such relationships are not uncommon in the tech industry, they are typically frowned upon due to the power dynamic that exists between managers and their employees.

These allegations and investigations have raised concerns about the company's lack of accountability and transparency, especially in regards to the handling of personnel issues. However, the company has claimed that it is making strides towards addressing these issues and creating a more equitable work environment.

In an email to employees obtained by The New York Times, CEO Sundar Pichai stated that the company had made changes to its policies to address the concerns raised by their workers. These policies include "prohibiting relationships between supervisors and direct reports and requiring all employees to complete sexual harassment training annually".

The resignation of Drummond, who was among the highest-paid executives at Alphabet, is seen as a significant milestone in the company's efforts to address its cultural challenges. It is also a sign that the company may be taking a more proactive approach to issues of misconduct and accountability.

While his departure is undoubtedly a loss to the company, it also provides an opportunity to implement meaningful change within Alphabet. With its mission statement of making the world's information universally accessible and useful, the company cannot afford to continue tolerating a work culture that is rife with professional misconduct and unethical behavior.

It remains to be seen what impact Drummond's departure will have on Alphabet in the long run, but it is clear that the company has a long way to go in order to create a truly equitable and inclusive work environment. Only time will tell if the changes they are making are sufficient to address the issues that have been raised.