The sharing economy has revolutionized the way we travel, stay in homes away from home and even access transportation. Despite the convenience that the likes of Airbnb and Uber bring into our lives, they have also faced stiff opposition from trade unions and other bodies that represent incumbent industries trying to protect their turf. A new union, UNITE HERE, stands out as an organization that has successfully taken on Airbnb head-on and won.

UNITE HERE is America’s third-largest hotel workers’ labor union, representing roughly 300,000 workers in the hospitality industry. The union waged a long and bruising campaign against Airbnb, accusing it of undercutting hotels and bed-and-breakfasts, enabling unscrupulous hosts to avoid taxes or flout safety rules all while taking jobs away from hard-working locals.

The vitriol between UNITE HERE and Airbnb grew in 2015 when San Francisco’s Board of Supervisors was considering tighter regulations for home-sharing companies. Airbnb retaliated against UNITE HERE’s crippling ads in San Francisco accusing them of plans to snatch away short-term rentals from struggling families dependent on Airbnb.

But UNITE HERE won that battle in late 2015 when the city passed regulations that require hosts to submit quarterly reports to the city detailing who they’re renting out to and how much they’re making.

Now, UNITE HERE is turning its attention to a new target: Expedia Group Inc.’s HomeAway, one of the largest vacation rental companies in the world. The union launched a campaign targeting HomeAway’s listing site Vrbo, accusing it of short-changing customers, raising fees on homeowners, and fudging safety inspections among other claims. The union’s assault on HomeAway is backed by powerful city and state politicians.

The union is pushing for regulations across the U.S. that would require the company to share with local authorities more detailed information about the people listing homes on its site, including names and addresses, and to provide more information to local officials collecting hotel and vacation rental taxes. UNITE HERE’s campaign has already put HomeAway on the defensive, with the company saying it is open to collaborating with the hotel workers’ union to come up with a viable compromise.

While some commentators argue that UNITE HERE’s mission is to disrupt established businesses and force them to hire unionized workers, the union said it represents the interests of workers in the hospitality industry, who often struggle to make ends meet. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, median pay for hotel workers is $23,000, and nearly half work part-time.

UNITE HERE won against Airbnb, but it’s hard to say what the outcome will be with HomeAway. Vrbo is a formidable rival, with more than 2 million vacation rentals in over 190 countries around the world. However, it’s crystal clear that labor unions such as UNITE HERE are not going to go down without a fight. They represent a rising tide of pushes back against the sharing economy’s disruptors who they believe pose a threat to not only business interests but the well-being of their constituents.