In a major development this week, a federal judge indicated her approval of the University of Southern California’s $215 million settlement with the former patients of ex-gynecologist George Tyndall. This settlement follows years of legal battles and investigations surrounding allegations of sexual assault and misconduct against Tyndall, who treated thousands of patients at USC’s student health center over a three-decade period.

The proposed settlement, which was originally announced in October 2018, would provide compensation to over 17,000 former patients of Tyndall’s, as well as establish new measures for preventing sexual harassment and abuse in USC’s healthcare system. The settlement was reached after extensive negotiations between USC and the plaintiffs’ attorneys, and has been hailed as one of the largest settlements of its kind in U.S. history.

However, the settlement has also faced criticism from some who argue that it is not enough to address the harm experienced by Tyndall’s former patients. Some have argued that the settlement does not go far enough in holding USC accountable for its role in allowing Tyndall to continue practicing for years despite reports of misconduct, and that it fails to provide adequate support for victims’ ongoing medical and psychological needs.

Despite these concerns, U.S. District Judge Stephen Wilson signaled her approval of the settlement in a hearing earlier this week, stating that “It will provide substantial compensation for a large class of plaintiffs who have been subject to trauma and harm, and it will put in place significant measures to prevent similar conduct from occurring in the future.”

If the settlement is ultimately approved, it will mark a important step forward in the ongoing movement to address sexual harassment and abuse in healthcare settings. However, it also serves as a reminder that there is still much work to be done to prevent these abuses from happening in the first place. As USC president Carol Folt stated in a recent op-ed for the Los Angeles Times, “We cannot undo the past, but we can work tirelessly to shift the culture, to raise awareness, to create new systems and to foster a better sense of responsibility for each other and for the communities we serve.”

In the wake of this settlement, it will be important for USC and other healthcare institutions to continue taking concrete steps to prevent and respond to sexual harassment and abuse. This will require a sustained commitment to listening to survivors, instituting new policies and procedures, providing support and resources for those affected by abuse, and working to foster a culture of respect and safety for all patients and providers. Only through these efforts can we hope to create a healthcare system that truly serves and protects those who seek care.