On January 8, 2020, President Donald Trump addressed the nation in response to Iran's recent missile attacks on U.S. forces in Iraq. The following is the full transcript of his address as provided by The New York Times.

"Good evening. My fellow Americans, as President of the United States, my first and highest duty is to defend our great country and the American people. I swore an oath to uphold the Constitution, and that includes protecting the safety and security of Americans at home and abroad. Tonight, I want to talk to you about the grave and imminent threat posed by the Iranian regime to the peace and security of our world.

For many years, Iran has been the world’s leading state sponsor of terror. It has fueled conflicts in Syria and Yemen, and it has supported terrorist proxies and militias such as Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Taliban. Over the last four decades, Iran’s aggression has created a pattern of destabilization throughout the Middle East and beyond.

In recent months, Iran has escalated its aggression. On December 27th, an Iranian-backed militia killed an American citizen and wounded several American servicemen in a rocket attack on an Iraqi military base. On December 31st, the United States Embassy in Baghdad was attacked by Iranian-backed terrorists, who killed one of our soldiers and wounded many others. Iran has conducted other attacks against U.S. forces in Iraq and attempted to destroy a U.S. drone. All of these attacks were carried out under the direction of Qasem Soleimani, Iran’s top terrorist leader, who was killed last week in a targeted strike I ordered.

Soleimani was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of Americans and thousands of innocent civilians throughout the region. He had so much blood on his hands that he had been called “the world’s top terrorist” by our allies in the Middle East. He was plotting imminent and sinister attacks on American diplomats and military personnel, but we stopped him dead in his tracks.

Soleimani’s death was an action of self-defense, and a powerful blow to Iran’s terrorist army. But we are not seeking escalation or conflict with Iran. We are seeking peace, prosperity, and a better future for Iran and the entire Middle East. That is why, after our successful strike against Soleimani, I called on Iran to sit down and negotiate a new deal to replace the failed nuclear deal with Iran. And that is why we have imposed strong sanctions on Iran’s economy.

Iran must abandon its nuclear ambitions and end its support for terrorism. It must stop threatening our allies and partners in the region, and it must respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi government. If Iran chooses to make peace and act as a responsible member of the international community, it can become a prosperous and successful nation.

But in the meantime, we will never allow Iran to develop nuclear weapons, and we will always defend our great country and the American people. Thank you, and God bless America."