In the latest political showdown, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has refused to budge on the terms for the ongoing impeachment trial, causing a stalemate with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.

Without a proper resolution, the impeachment trial of President Donald Trump remains at a standstill. Pelosi has been withholding the articles of impeachment since last month, waiting for McConnell to detail the process of the Senate trial, but McConnell has stood firm in his decision to leave the matter up to the Senate's own internal rules.

The stalemate has engendered a war of words between the two leaders, with Pelosi accusing McConnell of trying to 'rig' the trial and protect Trump and McConnell labeling Pelosi's decision to withhold articles of impeachment as a 'shameful game of hide-and-seek.'

The crux of the conflict stems from McConnell's refusal to call witnesses before the Senate trial. Pelosi insists that several key witnesses who were not allowed to testify during the House impeachment hearings should be called by the Senate. These witnesses include former National Security Advisor John Bolton and White House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, who are believed to have firsthand information about Trump's alleged abuse of power in the Ukraine scandal.

McConnell, however, has rejected Pelosi's demands and has doubled down on his assertion that the Senate will follow its own established rules in conducting the impeachment trial. While the Senate Majority Leader has said that he isn't ruling out the possibility of calling witnesses at some point in the trial, it will be determined by a majority vote, which is likely to be ruled in the favor of the Republicans.

This hard-line approach by McConnell highlights the deep division between the Democrats and the Republicans on the issue of impeachment. With both parties unwilling to budge from their positions, it remains unclear how long the trial will remain in deadlock.

What is clear is that the impeachment of President Trump has polarized the nation and exposed the deep divisions in American politics. Whether the Senate trial will lead to a conviction or an acquittal of the President remains to be seen, but the fact that the process has come to a grinding halt showcases the current state of political gridlock in Washington.