Deval Patrick, the former governor of Massachusetts, has entered the race for the Democratic presidential nomination at a time when many voters have already made up their minds. Patrick is hoping for an unlikely surge in popularity, but for many voters it’s simply too late.

In the crowded field of Democratic candidates, Patrick has struggled to emerge as a front-runner. He entered the race late, announcing his candidacy only in November 2019, and has faced an uphill battle ever since.

Despite his low polling numbers and lack of national recognition, Patrick remains hopeful that he can appeal to voters who are looking for a candidate with experience and a strong record of leadership.

In a recent interview with The New York Times, Patrick discussed his improbably path to the presidency, saying, “I know it’s hard to come in as an underdog, but I’ve been here before.”

Patrick’s experience includes serving as assistant attorney general for civil rights under President Bill Clinton, as well as serving two terms as governor of Massachusetts from 2007 to 2015.

However, for many voters, Patrick’s late entry into the race has left them feeling as though he is simply too late to the game.

“I appreciate his experience and his track record, but it’s awfully late for another candidate to jump in,” said Sarah Henderson, a voter from New Hampshire, one of the early primary states.

Another voter, Michael Wagner from Iowa, expressed similar sentiments, saying “I’m not sure what he brings to the table that we haven’t already seen.”

Patrick’s campaign is banking on his ability to connect with voters on a personal level, drawing on his experience with poverty and segregation as a child growing up on the South Side of Chicago.

“This is about listening to people and being in a position to listen and to be recognized as somebody who actually cares,” Patrick said in a recent interview.

As the first primary elections approach, Patrick faces an uphill battle to break through and earn the support of voters. However, he remains optimistic about his chances.

“People may have made their choices, but they might choose again,” he said.

Only time will tell whether Patrick’s late entry into the race will ultimately help or hurt him, and whether he can convince voters that he has what it takes to win the nomination and defeat President Donald Trump in the general election.