It is now clear that Donald Trump is not the president that America wanted. He’s proven himself to be a leader that is defined by divisiveness, disregard for decency, and distrust in the institutions that make America great.

As the world watches the slow-motion train wreck of the Trump presidency, many of us are left feeling angry, betrayed, and bewildered. Surely, we thought, a man like Trump could never be elected president. But here we are, living in a world where President Trump is a reality.

From the very beginning of his candidacy, Trump has been a figure of controversy. He stoked the flames of division, using racist and sexist rhetoric to play to his base. Many people wrote him off as a candidate who could never win, but they underestimated the power of his message.

Now, as Trump’s presidency continues to unfold, it’s becoming clearer that his brand of leadership is doing damage to the very institutions that are supposed to protect and serve the American people.

From his attacks on the media and the judiciary to his bizarre behavior on the international stage, Trump has made it clear that he is not a president for all Americans. He seems to take joy in stirring up controversy and sowing dissent, with little regard for the long-term consequences of his actions.

It’s disheartening to see the leader of the free world behave in such a manner. We were promised a president who would bring Americans together, who would be a voice of reason and calm in troubled times. Instead, we have a president who seems to delight in causing chaos and division.

The Trump presidency has been a wake-up call for Americans. It’s shown us that our country is not immune from the forces of extremism and hatred that have swept across the globe. We must remain vigilant and proactive in defense of our values, our rights, and our way of life.

But even as we face this new reality, it’s important to remember that there are still good people in this country who hold fast to the ideals of democracy, fairness, and decency. We must not give up hope, or allow ourselves to be defined by the divisive rhetoric of the Trump era.

The Trump we did not want to see is here, and we must do everything in our power to ensure that his brand of leadership does not define America for generations to come.