The 77th annual Golden Globe Awards, which aired on January 5th, saw the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) honor some of Hollywood’s finest performances of the past year. The evening was filled with highs and lows, with some winners coming as expected, while others were more surprising. At the end of the night, the confetti settled, and the spotlight shone on two films in particular: ‘Once Upon a Time…in Hollywood’ and ‘1917’.

‘Once Upon a Time…in Hollywood’ was the clear winner of the night, taking home Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy, as well as awards for Best Screenplay and Best Supporting Actor for Brad Pitt. Directed by Quentin Tarantino, the film takes place in 1969 Los Angeles, where struggling actor Rick Dalton (Leonardo DiCaprio) and his stunt double Cliff Booth (Brad Pitt) are trying to make it in the industry. It’s a love letter to the golden age of Hollywood, featuring sharp writing, strong performances, and an unforgettable finale that reshapes the history of the Manson murders.

Meanwhile, ‘1917’ won Best Motion Picture – Drama and Best Director for Sam Mendes. The film tells the story of two young British soldiers who are given a seemingly impossible mission during World War I: to cross enemy territory and deliver a message that will stop a deadly attack on hundreds of soldiers, including one of their brothers. Shot to look like one continuous take, the film immerses viewers in the chaos and horror of war, offering an unflinching and visceral experience.

Both films were the subject of buzz and critical acclaim leading up to the Golden Globes. ‘Once Upon a Time…in Hollywood’ premiered at the Cannes Film Festival last year and received a standing ovation, while ‘1917’ was praised for its technical achievements and powerful storytelling. Their successes last night further solidify their position as major contenders during awards season and foreshadow their potential to be forces to be reckoned with come Oscars night.

Other notable winners at the Golden Globes included Joaquin Phoenix for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama for ‘Joker’, Renée Zellweger for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama for ‘Judy’, and ‘Parasite’ for Best Foreign Language Film. Additionally, Tom Hanks received the prestigious Cecil B. DeMille Award for his contributions to the film industry.

Overall, the 77th annual Golden Globe Awards celebrated some of the most impactful and memorable films of the past year. While ‘Once Upon a Time…in Hollywood’ and ‘1917’ emerged as the big winners, the night was a reminder of the vast talent and creativity that exists within Hollywood and beyond. It will be exciting to see whether these films continue their streaks through the rest of awards season and ultimately on to the Academy Awards.