Australia is currently facing one of the worst bushfire seasons in its history, with large swathes of the country engulfed in flames. As the extent and intensity of the fires have grown, the Australian military has stepped in to help with the effort to combat the devastation.

According to The New York Times, the Australian government has deployed 3,000 army, navy and air force personnel, in addition to reservists and other resources, to help contain the fires. Over 12 million acres of land have been burned, with an estimated one billion animals killed in the fires.

The scale of the disaster has been described as “an atomic bomb” by New South Wales Rural Fire Service commissioner, Shane Fitzsimmons. The fires have swept through communities, destroying over 2,000 homes and businesses, and cutting off thousands of residents from transportation and essential services.

The military has been deployed to assist with the logistics of fighting the bushfires, including air and sea support as well as transportation for firefighters and equipment. Some personnel have also been tasked with providing humanitarian aid to affected communities, including medical and veterinary care and emergency accommodation.

The Australian government has come under criticism for what some perceive as a lack of action in addressing the root causes of the bushfire crisis, namely climate change. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has been criticized for his government’s policies on emissions reductions and for his refusal to meet with leaders of affected communities.

The bushfire crisis has brought into sharp focus the need for action on climate change, with scientists warning that events like these are likely to become more frequent and intense as global temperatures rise. The Australian government’s response to the bushfires will be closely watched by the international community, and may serve as a wake-up call for other nations to take action on climate change.

In the meantime, Australia’s military is playing a critical role in containing the disaster and providing support to affected communities. The bravery and selflessness of the country’s firefighters and emergency personnel have also been widely praised, and may represent the best hope for Australia in the face of this devastating crisis.