Since the initiation of the trade war, the Trump administration has imposed tariffs on Chinese imports to the United States in an effort to reduce the trade deficit and to protect American industries. However, the tariffs imposed by the administration have had a greater impact on the American consumers than China.

The idea behind tariffs is to make imported goods more expensive, so that domestic goods are more affordable and, in turn, protected. However, the opposite has happened in this trade war with China. The tariffs imposed by the Trump administration on China have mostly been passed onto consumers, who are now paying more for the same goods they were buying before.

Many companies are also absorbing the costs of the tariffs by reducing their profit margins, but no business can sustain that for very long without laying off workers or reducing investment in research and development.

The direct impact of the tariffs has been on the American consumers. The administration's move to impose tariffs on China has led to an increase in the prices of imported goods such as electronics, appliances, and other daily essentials. While President Trump's tactic may seem like a way to protect American industry, in the end, it actually means that more Americans have to pay for goods that were once affordable.

The agricultural industry is one of the biggest losers in this saga. China is an important export market for American farmers, particularly soybean growers. Since China has retaliated with tariffs of their own, US farmers have lost out as China turns to other nations to buy the same goods. This has led to surplus of production and the reduction of the price of crops, which in turn has hurt American farmers.

Furthermore, American businesses that are dependent on Chinese imports are also suffering, particularly small businesses. The increased prices from tariffs may make it difficult for these businesses to operate and keep their products affordable to their customers.

President Trump’s tariff policy may have been initiated with the intention of making China pay, but in reality, the obvious impact has been that American consumers are shouldering the burden of the tariffs. The administration should continue with its efforts to reach an agreement with China that would result in a fair and beneficial trade policy for both countries, instead of imposing tariffs that backfire on American consumers.