As we have passed the halfway point of the 2020-21 NHL season, it’s worth taking a moment to reflect on what we’ve seen so far. The compressed, pandemic-shortened 56-game schedule has led to an intense and exciting season thus far, even as teams have struggled with postponed games and a lack of fans in the stands. Here are some of the key storylines and takeaways from the season thus far.

The East is a Battle Royale: The revamped East division has lived up to expectations as being one of the most competitive in the NHL. The Boston Bruins, the Washington Capitals, and the New York Islanders all remain at the top of the standings, though the Pittsburgh Penguins and Philadelphia Flyers are not far behind. The Buffalo Sabres and New York Rangers are currently the only teams out of playoff contention, but with so many games still ahead, anything can happen in this division.

A Season of Surprises: One of the biggest surprises of the season has been the success of the Montreal Canadiens. After failing to make the playoffs last season, the Canadiens currently hold one of the top spots in the North division. Additionally, the Florida Panthers have exceeded many expectations, sitting in second place in the Central division behind the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Tampa Bay Lightning. The Los Angeles Kings have also been a pleasant surprise, with a solid record in the West division.

Superstars Shine: The league’s top players have continued to dominate this season. The Edmonton Oilers’ Connor McDavid and Leon Draisaitl lead the league in points, followed closely by the Colorado Avalanche’s Nathan MacKinnon. The Toronto Maple Leafs’ Auston Matthews is on pace for a 50-goal season and is making a strong case for the Hart Trophy. On the defensive side, the Nashville Predators’ Roman Josi and Tampa Bay Lightning’s Victor Hedman have been standouts, anchoring their respective teams’ blue lines.

COVID-19 Concerns Linger: While the league has done an admirable job of keeping players and staff safe from the coronavirus, there have still been disruptions to the season. The Dallas Stars had to postpone four games earlier in the season due to a COVID-19 outbreak, and other teams have had to play shorthanded due to players being placed on the league’s COVID-19 protocol list. As the season progresses, it remains to be seen how many more games will be affected by the ongoing pandemic.

The Playoffs Are Anyone’s Game: With the compressed schedule and postseason format changes, this year’s playoffs will be unpredictable. The top four teams in each division will make the playoffs in a round-robin format, with the remaining four playoff spots going to teams based on their points percentage. This means that teams that struggle early in the season could still make a late push for the playoffs, and anything can happen in a best-of-seven series.

As we approach the final stretch of the season, there’s no telling what will happen. But one thing is certain: the NHL has continued to provide excitement and entertainment for fans during a challenging time.