Military families face unique challenges when it comes to education. With frequent moves and deployments, military kids can change schools up to nine times during their K-12 years. These transitions can be disruptive to their education and result in missed opportunities for academic and social growth.

The good news is that there are ways to make these transitions easier for military families. In an opinion piece published in The New York Times, Karen Jowers argues that the Department of Defense should do more to support military families during these critical times.

One solution is to expand the Military Interstate Children's Compact Commission (MIC3), a program that supports military families during transitions between schools. The commission currently includes 47 member states and provides assistance with enrollment, course placement, and graduation requirements.

Jowers suggests that the program should be expanded beyond its current membership to cover all 50 states, including the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. This would ensure that military families have consistent support regardless of where they are stationed.

Another solution is to provide more resources for military families during the transition process. This could include a dedicated website with information on local schools, housing, and community resources. Additionally, schools could provide more resources for military kids, such as counseling services and extracurricular activities.

These solutions would not only benefit military families but also the schools they attend. Military kids bring a unique perspective and set of experiences to the classroom. They are often well-traveled and have exposure to different cultures, languages, and ways of thinking. This diversity can enrich the classroom experience for all students.

By supporting military families during their transitions between schools, we are investing in the future of our nation. Military kids have the potential to become leaders in their communities and the nation as a whole. It's time we recognize their sacrifices and provide the support they need to succeed.