The Federal Reserve is embarking on a new journey as they revisit bank rules for poor communities. This comes amidst increasing concern that many low-income neighborhoods and communities of color have limited access to affordable and safe banking services. These communities are often seen as risky investments by banks, which has left them with fewer choices and higher fees for financial services.

The New York Times reports that the Federal Reserve is seeking to address this issue by revisiting the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), which was first enacted in 1977 in response to the discriminatory practices and credit redlining of banks at the time. The CRA requires banks to make loans and provide services to low- and moderate-income communities in the neighborhoods where they do business.

However, the CRA has not kept up with the changing financial landscape and the rise of online banking. In recent years, there has been a growing concern that the CRA needs to be updated to ensure that banks are meeting the needs of the communities they serve.

The Federal Reserve's approach to improving the CRA is drawing some criticism. Some civil rights advocates and community groups argue that the changes proposed by the Federal Reserve do not go far enough to address the problems faced by low-income communities. They argue that the proposed changes would not do enough to hold banks accountable for failing to provide adequate services to these communities.

Despite the criticisms, the Federal Reserve's move to revise the CRA is a step in the right direction. It represents a recognition that banks have a responsibility to serve the communities where they do business. By revisiting the CRA, the Federal Reserve is taking steps to ensure that banks are held accountable for meeting the needs of low-income communities.

The future of the CRA remains uncertain. It is unknown whether changes proposed by the Federal Reserve will be adopted, and if they are, whether they will be sufficient to address the needs of low-income communities. But one thing is clear: The Federal Reserve's action represents a commitment to creating a more just and equitable financial system for all Americans.

In the end, the success of the CRA will depend on the collective efforts of banks, regulators, and communities to work together to ensure that all Americans have access to safe and affordable financial services. We must all do our part to make this vision a reality.