As tensions between the United States and Iran continue to soar, Iranians living in Los Angeles, a city with the largest Iranian population outside of Iran, are closely watching the developments unfold. Many in the community are not shedding tears over the recent killing of Qassem Suleimani, the Iranian military leader who was assassinated by a U.S. drone strike in Iraq. But what comes next is anyone's guess.

Some members of the Iranian community in Los Angeles have a complicated view of the former commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps’ Quds Force. While Suleimani was viewed as a hero by some Iranians for his work in fighting ISIS in Syria and Iraq, others saw him as a brutal enforcer of the regime's repression of dissidents at home.

Despite the nuanced views, many in the Iranian community in Los Angeles are not mourning Suleimani's death. In fact, there have been celebrations in parts of the city's Little Persia neighborhood since the news broke. Some see the killing as a victory for the Iranian people, who many say have been victimized by the regime's policies.

However, there are concerns about what comes next. The Iranian government has promised retaliation for Suleimani's death and tensions between the two countries have been escalating for some time. Iranian-American journalist, Jasmin Darznik, who is based in Los Angeles, said that people are worried about what form the retaliation will take and whether it will affect their families in Iran.

Beyond the immediate concerns, there is also a sense of unease about the long-term implications of the conflict. As Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has said, this is a new era of maximum pressure on Iran, which will likely have significant ramifications for the Iranian-American community in Los Angeles and beyond.

One of the biggest fears is that the conflict will lead to increased stigmatization and discrimination against the Iranian community in the United States. Already, Iranians have been subjected to increased scrutiny at airports and border crossings, and many are worried that things could get worse.

Ultimately, what happens next is largely out of the hands of the Iranian diaspora in Los Angeles. However, what they can do is provide a nuanced perspective on the situation, one that goes beyond the simplistic narratives that are often pushed by politicians and the media. By sharing their experiences and insights, they can help to build bridges between the two countries and prevent a dangerous escalation of the conflict.