As attacks on places of worship continue to rise in frequency, the leaders of one church in Florida have taken measures to protect their congregation.

Pastor Daniel Rodriguez of the New Life Assembly of God in Coral Springs, Florida, has instructed his church members to bring either Bibles or hot coffee to Sunday services. The pastor believes that these items can be used to fend off potential attackers and protect the churchgoers.

“It’s sad that we have to think about these things, but we have to be prepared,” Pastor Rodriguez said in an interview with The New York Times. “We don’t want to be caught off guard. We want to be able to defend ourselves and our congregation if needed.”

The decision to arm the congregation with Bibles or hot coffee was made after several recent attacks on churches in the United States left many dead or injured. Pastor Rodriguez and his security team felt that this was a practical solution that would not require the use of deadly force.

“We’re not advocating violence, but we have to think about the safety of everyone,” he said. “We believe that having something to throw at an attacker could buy us some time to get our people to safety.”

The use of everyday items for self-defense is not a new concept. Self-defense experts have long recommended using items such as keys, pens, or even umbrellas as makeshift weapons in emergencies.

However, the idea of using Bibles or hot coffee has drawn mixed reactions from the public. Some feel that it is a creative and practical solution to a serious problem, while others believe that it is not enough and that more serious measures are needed.

Despite the criticism, Pastor Rodriguez stands by his decision and believes that his church is better prepared to protect its members. “I hope we never have to use them, but it’s better to be safe than sorry,” he said.

As the threat of attacks on places of worship continues to grow, it is important for church leaders to take proactive measures to protect their congregations. Whether it’s arming them with Bibles or hot coffee, or investing in more advanced security systems and training, churches must prioritize the safety of their members.