Megyn Kelly, the former Fox News anchor, recently took to YouTube to discuss her experiences with the late Roger Ailes, the former chairman and CEO of Fox News. In a nearly 30-minute video titled "My Thoughts on the Roger Ailes Bombshell Movie," Kelly shared her thoughts on the new film "Bombshell," which depicts the sexual harassment and misconduct allegations that ultimately led to Ailes' downfall.

Kelly began the video by acknowledging that she had a "complicated relationship" with Ailes, who she said "was both a mentor and often a tormentor." She described him as a "complicated man who did many good things but who also hurt many people, including me."

Kelly went on to discuss the film "Bombshell," which she said was "surprisingly accurate" in its depiction of the culture at Fox News during the time she worked there. She commended the film's director, Jay Roach, and its screenwriter, Charles Randolph, for being "careful to stick to the facts" and not exaggerate or sensationalize the events.

But there were a few things that Kelly took issue with in the film. One was the portrayal of her relationship with Ailes. While she acknowledged that he had made inappropriate comments to her in the past, she said that the film depicted their relationship as more antagonistic than it actually was.

"I didn't leave Fox News because of Roger Ailes," Kelly said in the video. "I left because of Donald Trump."

She also criticized the film for portraying Megyn Kelly as "a victim," saying that she never saw herself that way. "I'm not a big fan of victimhood," she said. "I think sometimes it's overplayed."

Overall, Kelly said that while she was glad "Bombshell" was shedding light on the issue of sexual harassment in the workplace, she hoped that people would not come away with the impression that all men in positions of power are "monsters." She also expressed hope that the film would lead to more nuanced discussions about the issue.

"I hope this film prompts more dialogue about sexual harassment and how we can create safer, healthier workplaces for everyone," she said. "That's a conversation I'm happy to have."