The recent assassination of Iranian General Qasem Soleimani has stirred up a sense of outrage and fury in Iraq, as well as in Iran. In the wake of the targeted attack by the US military, funerals have been held for the slain commanders, and the air has been filled with the cries of 'revenge is coming'. Despite the danger, thousands of people have taken to the streets to mourn the loss of their leaders and demand justice.

These events highlight the complexity of the situation in Iraq, which has been torn apart by war and regional tensions in recent years. Soleimani was a key figure in the Iranian government, and his assassination has put the entire Middle East on edge. The United States and Iran have been locked in a struggle for power and influence for many years, and this latest escalation could push the region into further conflict.

At the funerals for the slain commanders, emotions were running high. Thousands of people attended the services, many of them chanting anti-US slogans and calling for revenge. Some even threatened to attack US military bases in the region, which would undoubtedly lead to more violence and bloodshed.

The situation in Iraq is fragile, and the assassination of Soleimani has only made things worse. The country has already been struggling to deal with the aftermath of a long and devastating war, as well as political instability and a divided society. The US military presence in the region has only added to the tension, and many Iraqis feel that their sovereignty has been violated by foreign powers.

The cries of 'revenge is coming' at the funerals for the slain commanders in Iraq are a clear indication of the anger and frustration that many people in the region are feeling right now. It is important for the United States to tread carefully in dealing with Iraq and Iran, and to seek diplomatic solutions to the problems that are facing the region. Any more violence or aggression will only lead to more instability and suffering for the people of Iraq and the wider Middle East.

In the end, the only way to resolve the conflict is through dialogue and cooperation between all the parties involved. It will not be an easy road, but it is the only way forward for a region that has suffered too much already. The cries of 'revenge is coming' must be replaced with a commitment to peace and stability, and a willingness to work together for the good of all.