The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (N.A.A.C.P.) has sent a strong message to its local chapters across the United States: don’t let the energy industry manipulate you. The N.A.A.C.P. has been a leading voice on issues of racial justice and equity for more than a century, and now it’s taking a stand against the powerful fossil fuel lobby.

The energy industry has a long history of exploiting communities of color and low-income communities. From toxic pollution to environmental degradation, these communities have borne the brunt of our dependence on fossil fuels. Now, as the energy industry tries to maintain its grip on our energy system, it’s clear that it will stop at nothing to protect its profits.

That’s where the N.A.A.C.P. comes in. Its local chapters have been working to promote clean energy and fight climate change for years. But the energy industry has also been working to co-opt these efforts, using the lure of jobs and economic growth to gain support for polluting energy projects.

The N.A.A.C.P. is saying enough is enough. In a recent letter to all of its chapters, the organization warned against falling for the industry’s empty promises. “We cannot allow our communities to be used as pawns in the energy industry’s efforts to maintain the status quo,” the letter stated.

This is a critical moment for our country. We’re facing a climate crisis that threatens our health, our economy, and our very way of life. And yet, we still rely on dirty, harmful energy sources to power our homes, businesses, and transportation systems. It’s time for a change.

The N.A.A.C.P. is leading the way by calling out the energy industry’s tactics and standing up for clean energy and environmental justice. Its message to its local chapters is clear: don’t let the energy industry manipulate you. Instead, work towards a better, cleaner, more equitable future for all.

As the global community works to address the climate crisis, we need more organizations like the N.A.A.C.P. to take a stand against the fossil fuel industry. By working together, we can create a brighter, healthier, and more just future for ourselves and the generations to come.