As a writer and advocate for the environment, I can't help but voice my concern over the recent decision by the Trump administration to weaken environmental rules. The New York Times recently featured an article titled "Opinion | Trump’s Weakening of Environmental Rules Would Leave the Public in the Dark" which perfectly sums up the issue at hand.

The article highlights the fact that the Trump administration is proposing to limit the amount of scientific and medical research that can be used to make regulations. This means that the government will ignore studies that show the harmful effects of pollutants and chemicals on our health and the environment. Instead, the administration wants to rely on studies that have been sponsored by the industries that the regulations would impact.

It's baffling to me that in today's world, we would want to ignore scientific evidence and studies that can help keep our environment safe and healthy. The public deserves to know what kinds of chemicals and pollutants are in their air and water, and what kind of impact they have on their health. By weakening environmental rules, the Trump administration is essentially leaving the public in the dark.

But it's not just the public that will be impacted. Environmental regulations also help protect the planet for future generations. By weakening these rules, we are essentially prioritizing profits over the health of our planet and the well-being of our children and grandchildren.

There is no denying that environmental regulations help keep us safe and healthy. By ignoring scientific evidence and limiting the amount of research that can be used to make regulations, we are essentially sacrificing the health of the planet and its inhabitants for short-term financial gain.

As a writer, I implore the government to reconsider their decision to weaken environmental rules. The public deserves transparency and access to accurate information about the state of our environment. Without it, we are essentially flying blind, and that is not a risk that we can afford to take.