As the House of Representatives formally began its impeachment inquiry into President Trump, there was initially a sense of anticipation among those seeking to hold him accountable for his actions. But as the process has unfolded, it has become clear that some Democrats are pursuing an approach that is far too cautious and limited in scope.

Call it Impeachment Light.

Instead of focusing on the full range of potentially impeachable offenses committed by the president, including his obstruction of justice, his abuse of power, and his violations of the emoluments clause, some Democrats are narrowly targeting just one aspect of his conduct: his efforts to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rival Joe Biden.

Don’t get me wrong: These efforts were troubling and very likely violate the law. But it’s hard to justify an impeachment inquiry that ignores so many other ways that Trump has flouted the Constitution and abused the powers of his office.

For starters, Trump has sought to obstruct investigations into his own conduct at every turn, from firing FBI Director James Comey to interfering with the investigation of special counsel Robert Mueller. He has also repeatedly used the presidency to enrich himself and his family, accepting foreign payments at his hotels and engaging in other blatant conflicts of interest.

All of these actions are serious abuses of power that go to the very heart of our democracy. And yet some Democrats seem content to give Trump a pass on these transgressions in order to limit the scope of the impeachment inquiry.

To be sure, there are political considerations at play here. Many Democrats are worried that pursuing a broader impeachment inquiry could backfire on them, either by energizing Trump’s base or by distracting from other important issues in the run-up to the 2020 election.

But as the framers of the Constitution understood, impeachment is not primarily a political tool. It is a legal mechanism for holding officials accountable for abuses of power and defending the integrity of our democracy. And if Democrats are not willing to use that mechanism to its fullest extent, they risk abdicating their constitutional duty and sending a message that even egregious violations of the law are not worthy of impeachment.

If we want to preserve our democracy and hold our leaders accountable, we cannot settle for Impeachment Light. We must pursue a thorough and comprehensive investigation into all of the president’s potential high crimes and misdemeanors, no matter where the evidence leads us. Anything less risks setting a dangerous precedent and undermining the rule of law for generations to come.