In a major development for the controversial right-wing border militia movement, its leader has pleaded guilty to a federal gun charge. The plea, which was entered in court in New Mexico on Monday, is likely to have ripple effects throughout the movement and could serve as a warning to other militia leaders.

Larry Mitchell Hopkins, who goes by the nickname “Striker,” heads up the United Constitutional Patriots, a militia group that has made headlines for its vigilante-style patrols along the U.S.-Mexico border. The group claims to be working with Border Patrol agents to apprehend undocumented immigrants, but has been accused of illegally detaining migrants and violating their civil rights in the process.

Hopkins’ plea comes after he was arrested in April for allegedly being in possession of firearms as a convicted felon. He had previously been convicted of impersonating a police officer and felony firearm possession.

In court on Monday, Hopkins admitted that he had knowingly possessed nine firearms despite being a felon. As part of his plea agreement, the government will drop four other weapons charges against him.

The guilty plea is a significant blow to the United Constitutional Patriots and the broader militia movement. Hopkins had become a vocal spokesperson for the group, appearing in media interviews and even traveling to Washington, D.C., to meet with lawmakers.

The militia movement has faced growing scrutiny and criticism in recent years, particularly in the wake of the 2017 “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, which was attended by far-right groups including militias. The rally turned violent, with one counter-protester killed and dozens injured.

Critics say that militias like the United Constitutional Patriots promote extremist ideologies and can exacerbate tensions along the border. They have called on law enforcement to crack down on these groups and hold their leaders accountable.

Hopkins’ guilty plea may be a sign that the government is taking these concerns seriously. It remains to be seen what sort of punishment he will receive, but the fact that he is now a convicted felon may serve as a deterrent to others in the militia movement.

At the same time, however, the plea could also galvanize supporters of the United Constitutional Patriots and other militias. They may see Hopkins as a martyr or a hero and use his case to rally their members.

The debate over militias’ role in border security is likely to continue, but for now, Hopkins’ plea is a major development in the ongoing struggle between law enforcement and these far-right groups.