The recent attack on a synagogue in Poway, California has left the Jewish community reeling with yet another tragedy. One of the victims, a 60-year-old woman named Lori Gilbert Kaye, was killed in the attack while another victim, a 8-year-old girl, was injured. However, perhaps the most heartbreaking news to come out of the attack is that one of its victims, identified as Almog Peretz, is unlikely to awake from his coma, according to his family.

Peretz, a 34-year-old Israeli man who was visiting family in California, was shot in both legs as he heroically tried to save children during the attack. He was rushed to the hospital where he underwent surgery but has remained in a coma since the attack on Saturday. 

Peretz, who is a father of five, had previously served in the Israeli Army and had experience with emergency situations. His quick thinking and bravery in the midst of chaos undoubtedly saved lives during the attack, but unfortunately, his selflessness came at a great cost.

The family released a statement on Monday saying, "Our family appreciates the outpouring of support and love from the community, but we ask for privacy as we mourn and focus on Almog’s recovery."

The attack at Poway synagogue is just the latest in a series of anti-Semitic incidents that have occurred in the United States in recent years, including the Tree of Life synagogue shooting in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in October 2018, which left 11 people dead.

The rise of anti-Semitism in America is concerning for the Jewish community, who have faced persecution throughout history. This recent attack serves as a reminder that hate and bigotry are still prevalent in our society, and something needs to be done to address it.

As we mourn the loss of Kaye and pray for Peretz's recovery, let us also take this as an opportunity to stand in solidarity with the Jewish community and condemn all forms of hate and discrimination. We must do better as a society to ensure that tragedies like this never happen again.