Deval Patrick Hopes for an Unlikely Surge, but for Many, ‘It’s Awfully Late’ – The New York Times

As the race for the democratic nomination heats up, Deval Patrick, the former Massachusetts governor, has announced his bid for the presidency. With less than three months to go before the first round of voting, Patrick’s entrance into the race has been met with mixed reactions.

Some see him as a fresh face with significant experience. Others, however, consider his entry to be a futile attempt that will only serve to split the moderate vote and help Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, or perhaps even Joe Biden, win the nomination.

Despite his late entry into the race, Patrick remains optimistic about his chances. He has cast himself as a unifying figure who can appeal to both moderates and progressives, and has even positioned himself as a candidate to heal a divided nation.

But as The New York Times reports, there are serious doubts about whether Patrick can gain the traction he needs this late in the game. He is entering the race in a crowded field with high name recognition, well-funded campaigns, and strong grassroots support. His late entry, coupled with his less than formidable fundraising numbers, has led many to conclude that his campaign is doomed to fail.

In fact, the numbers tell the story: Deval Patrick is currently polling at less than one percent in most national polls. Moreover, with little time left before the first round of voting, he will have to make up significant ground in order to make a meaningful impact.

Even with his credentials as a former governor, and extensive relationships within the party, Patrick’s lack of resources, and the limited amount of time he has left to make his case means his path to victory is indeed, an uphill battle. In a field crowded with high-profile candidates, his name recognition, and funding trail behind those of Joe Biden, Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, and Pete Buttigieg.

As the 2020 race progresses, it is clear that Deval Patrick’s entry into the race will only further complicate an already complex contest. For some, it is yet another example of the lack of cohesion, and unity within the Democratic Party.

Undoubtedly, Patrick faces steep odds to secure the Democratic nomination. But for those that support him, his message of unity and his commitment to social justice, could present a refreshing option amidst the crowded field of candidates who seem to be shifting further and further to the left. In any case, this election cycle has shown the importance of open dialogue and pragmatic solutions, and we can only hope that these will win the day.