As tensions continue to escalate between the United States and Iran, it's important to examine our country's history and acknowledge the role we have played in the current state of affairs. Iranian blood is on our hands, too.

In 1953, the United States led a coup that overthrew Iran's democratically elected Prime Minister, Mohammad Mossadegh. This was done as a means to regain control of Iran's oil industry, which had been nationalized by Mossadegh's government. The U.S. installed a dictator, Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, who ruled the country with an iron fist for the next 25 years. During this time, the U.S. supported the Shah's brutal regime, providing military aid and assistance in suppressing dissent.

The Iranian Revolution in 1979 saw the overthrow of the Shah and the establishment of an Islamic Republic. The new government, led by Ayatollah Khomeini, was initially friendly to the United States. However, this changed when the U.S. supported Iraq in the Iran-Iraq War, providing Saddam Hussein with weapons and assistance in the form of intelligence. The war was devastating for Iran, with estimates of up to 1 million casualties. The U.S. played a major role in prolonging the conflict and exacerbating the suffering of the Iranian people.

Sanctions against Iran have been in place for decades, further crippling the country's economy and causing major suffering for its citizens. These sanctions have had a devastating effect on Iran's ability to provide basic necessities such as food and medical supplies for its people.

In recent years, the U.S. has pulled out of the Iran nuclear deal and imposed harsher sanctions on the country. This has only served to further destabilize the region and increase tensions between the two nations.

We cannot ignore the fact that our government's actions have played a significant role in the suffering of the Iranian people. It is important that we acknowledge this and work towards a more peaceful and constructive relationship with Iran. Instead of imposing sanctions and supporting regimes that oppress their citizens, we should be seeking to promote democracy and human rights in Iran and around the world.

The current escalation of tensions between the U.S. and Iran should serve as a wake-up call for us all. It is time to re-evaluate our policies and actions towards Iran and work towards a more peaceful and just world. Iranian blood is on our hands, but it is not too late to change course and strive towards reconciliation and mutual understanding.