Danez Smith, a black gender-nonconforming poet, recently released their third book, "Homie", and it has sparked an electrifying reaction in the poetry world. The collection is a series of poems written for and about Smith's friends, family, and fellow poets. From the very outset, the book takes its reader on a journey of friendship, joy, anger, despair, and hope.

The poems in "Homie" are raw, candid, and emotionally charged, tackling topics such as love, loss, police brutality, and racism. What makes Smith’s poetry so potent is the bold and unapologetic nature of their writing. Smith writes, "i am not still alive / ‘cause i did not die / when i was supposed to / i self-preservation, reliable // i hum sweetness / into my ears like stanzas of hymns / i tell myself the food ain’t poisoned / i tell myself the water ain’t freezin."

Homie is a deeply personal book, and there is a sense of intimacy that is evident throughout. It's almost as if we as the readers are being invited into the private lives of Smith and their community. We are given a glimpse into the tender moments of friendship, such as in "Dear Shamar," where Smith writes, "i'm thinking of you today / wanting to wrap around you / like sweat wraps around anyone in summer."

Yet, there are also moments of rage and defiance, such as in “not an elegy for Mike Brown,” where Smith writes, "some of us are killed / in pieces, some of us all at once / but still, we die / we tend to die too soon / & sometimes we die without justice."

Smith's poetry is a raw and unapologetic blend of humor, bittersweetness, and activism. They draw from their own personal experiences to craft a voice that is unapologetically queer and unapologetically black. Their unique style of writing captures the rawness of emotion in a way that is simultaneously soothing and unsettling.

In ‘Homie,’ Smith explores what it means to be human, and what it means to be a part of a community. They write with tenderness and honesty about the everyday complexities of life, and they do so with a sense of humor and wit that is refreshing.

"Homie" is a book of poetry that will stay with you long after you have put it down. It is a love letter to the people that Smith holds close to their heart, but it is also a rallying cry to all of us to be more human. It is a reminder that poetry still has the power to create real change in our world.