June Bacon-Bercey, a trailblazing African American meteorologist, passed away on July 3, 2019, at the age of 90. Her pioneering work in the field of meteorology opened doors for women and people of color, ultimately propelling her to become the first female television meteorologist in the United States.

Born in Wichita, Kansas, in 1928, Bacon-Bercey grew up during a time when opportunities for women and people of color were severely limited. However, her love for science and mathematics led her to pursue a degree in meteorology at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in the 1950s. At the time, she was one of only two African American women studying meteorology in the entire country.

Despite facing significant obstacles in her field, Bacon-Bercey remained relentless in her pursuit of a successful career. After graduating from UCLA, she began working at the National Weather Service in Washington, D.C., where she developed a passion for weather forecasting. When she realized that there were no female meteorologists working in television at the time, Bacon-Bercey took it upon herself to break the mold and shatter the glass ceiling.

In 1970, she became the first female television meteorologist in the United States after being hired by an ABC affiliate in Buffalo, New York. This accomplishment paved the way for other women and people of color to follow in her footsteps and helped to diversify the field of meteorology.

Throughout her career, Bacon-Bercey received numerous awards and accolades for her contributions to the field of meteorology. In 2018, she was inducted into the National Association of Black Journalists (NABJ) Hall of Fame for her groundbreaking work in weather broadcasting.

Bacon-Bercey's legacy will continue to inspire generations of women and people of color to pursue careers in STEM fields. By breaking barriers and blazing trails, she left an indelible mark on the world of meteorology and beyond. Her contributions will be remembered and celebrated for years to come.