Since the hashtag #MeToo began trending on social media in October 2017, much has been written about the movement's impact on society. From Hollywood to the halls of Congress, allegations of sexual harassment and assault have been brought to light, and the perpetrators have faced consequences for their actions.

However, nearly four years after the movement began, it's worth taking a closer look at what has been achieved and what still needs to be done.

On the one hand, it's clear that #MeToo has been a catalyst for change. In many industries, powerful men who previously operated with impunity have been held accountable for their actions. Harvey Weinstein, once one of Hollywood's most influential producers, is now serving a 23-year prison sentence for rape and sexual assault. In politics, influential figures like Senator Al Franken and former Vice President Joe Biden have faced consequences for allegations of inappropriate behavior.

Beyond the high-profile cases, #MeToo has also paved the way for more open conversations about sexual harassment and assault. Women and men who would not have otherwise talked about their experiences are now more likely to share their stories, whether on social media or with friends and family. This has led to a greater understanding of the pervasiveness of sexual harassment and assault and to a collective sense of outrage at the way in which many victims have been treated.

However, there is still much work to be done. While #MeToo has led to some positive changes, it has not solved the problem of sexual harassment and assault. Women and men continue to face harassment and assault in their personal and professional lives, and many victims still feel that they cannot speak up without fear of retaliation.

Additionally, there is a risk that #MeToo has led to a backlash against women, particularly in the workplace. Some men have expressed fear that they will be falsely accused of harassment or assault, and some have claimed that they are hesitant to hire or promote women for fear of allegations. This is not only counterproductive, but it also further marginalizes women in the workplace.

Finally, it's worth noting that #MeToo has not necessarily led to equal outcomes for all victims. Women of color and transgender individuals, for example, are often subject to unique forms of harassment and assault, and they may not receive the same level of support and attention as their white and cisgender counterparts.

Given all of these complexities, it's clear that #MeToo is an ongoing and evolving movement, rather than a fixed set of changes. As we move forward, we must continue to amplify the voices of victims, to hold powerful individuals accountable for their actions, and to work towards a world where everyone is safe from harassment and assault, regardless of their gender, race, or sexuality.