Tua Tagovailoa, Alabama's Star Quarterback, Will Enter the N.F.L. Draft - The New York Times

Tua Tagovailoa, the star quarterback of the University of Alabama football team, announced on Monday that he will forgo his senior season and enter the N.F.L. draft.

Tagovailoa, who led the Crimson Tide to a national championship in the 2017 season, is widely regarded as one of the top quarterback prospects in this year's draft.

The 21-year-old suffered a dislocated hip in November during a game against Mississippi State, which ended his season prematurely. The injury was so severe that many wondered if Tagovailoa would be able to play football again.

However, after successful surgery and months of rehabilitation, Tagovailoa announced his decision to enter the draft, writing in a letter to Alabama fans that "the decision was made after lots of prayer, talks with my family, and coaches, and thinking of my future both on and off the football field."

Tagovailoa's decision to enter the draft comes as no surprise to many who have been following his college career. In his three years at Alabama, he threw for 7,442 yards and 87 touchdowns while completing 69.3% of his passes. He also rushed for 340 yards and nine touchdowns.

Many N.F.L. scouts and executives believe that Tagovailoa has the potential to be a franchise quarterback in the league. His arm talent, accuracy, and ability to make plays outside of the pocket make him a highly sought-after prospect.

Tagovailoa's draft stock, however, has been somewhat complicated by his injury. Some teams may be concerned about his long-term health and whether he will be able to stay on the field. Nonetheless, his talent is undeniable, and he is expected to be one of the top picks in the draft.

Alabama coach Nick Saban released a statement praising Tagovailoa and wishing him well in the draft: "Tua has been an outstanding player for us in his three years here, and a great leader for our team. He and his family are wonderful people who have contributed so much to our program and to the Alabama family. We look forward to watching him go on and do great things at the next level."

Tagovailoa's decision to enter the N.F.L. draft marks the end of an impressive college career and the beginning of a new chapter for the young quarterback. As he prepares for the next level, many will be watching to see what kind of impact he will have on the N.F.L. and whether he can live up to the hype that surrounds him.