More People Are Dying on New York City’s Streets. What Went Wrong?

New York City has set an ambitious goal to eliminate traffic fatalities and serious injuries on its streets by 2024 as part of its Vision Zero initiative. However, recent data shows that more people are dying on the city’s streets than in the past few years. This raises the question of what went wrong and whether Vision Zero is still on track.

According to the New York Police Department, there were 244 traffic fatalities in the city in 2020, compared to 219 deaths in 2019. This is a 12% increase in deaths, despite the fact that there were fewer cars on the road due to the pandemic.

One reason for the increase in deaths is the rise in reckless driving during the pandemic. With fewer cars on the road, many drivers felt a sense of impunity and engaged in speeding, red-light running, and other dangerous behaviors. In fact, the number of speeding tickets issued in the city rose by 60% in 2020, compared to the previous year.

Another factor is the lack of safe infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists. Many of the city’s streets were designed primarily for cars, with little consideration for other modes of transportation. As a result, pedestrians and cyclists are forced to navigate dangerous intersections and narrow sidewalks, which increases their risk of being involved in a crash.

The pandemic also exposed deep inequities in access to safe streets. Low-income and Black and Latino communities, which have been hit hardest by the pandemic, also have the highest rates of traffic fatalities and injuries. These communities are more likely to have dangerous streets with little or no infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists.

While Vision Zero has made important strides in improving street safety in the city, these recent statistics show that there is still much work to be done. To continue progress toward the goal of zero traffic fatalities and serious injuries, the city needs to prioritize the needs of vulnerable road users, invest in infrastructure that improves safety, and enforce traffic laws more rigorously.

In addition, education and outreach are critical components of Vision Zero. Many drivers are not aware of the dangers of speeding or failing to yield to pedestrians and cyclists. The city needs to do more to educate the public about safe driving habits and the importance of respecting all road users.

Eliminating traffic fatalities and serious injuries on New York City’s streets is a lofty goal, but it is achievable. However, it will require a concerted effort from all stakeholders, including city officials, transportation advocates, and the public. By working together, we can create safe and equitable streets that benefit all New Yorkers.