Charlize Theron and Salma Hayek are among the many high-profile figures who have been named as potential witnesses in the Harvey Weinstein case.

Weinstein, the former Hollywood mogul, faces multiple charges of sexual assault and rape in a trial that began earlier this month. While the trial is currently ongoing, the media has been abuzz with speculation about who might take the stand to testify against the disgraced producer.

Theron and Hayek are two of the biggest names to have been mentioned in connection with the case. Theron is an award-winning actress who has been outspoken about issues of sexual harassment and assault in the industry, while Hayek made headlines in 2017 when she alleged that Weinstein had subjected her to unwanted advances during the making of the film Frida.

Both women could provide powerful testimony in the trial, which is expected to last for several more weeks. Theron, for example, has previously spoken about her experiences with Weinstein and the broader culture of abuse in Hollywood.

In a 2018 interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Theron said that she had to stand up to Weinstein on multiple occasions, and that she had even been threatened by him. “I was in a room with him — I’m sure I have the same story as a lot of women — where I thought, ‘Hmm…This is strange,’” she said. “He’s never been inappropriate with me. Maybe it’s because I’m not… I don’t know.”

Hayek, meanwhile, has been even more vocal about her experiences. In a powerful op-ed for The New York Times, she detailed the harrowing ordeal of working with Weinstein on Frida, and described the emotional toll that it took on her.

“If Harvey Weinstein had not been exposed, I might have taken my secret to the grave,” she wrote. “I have scars from battles fought and won, but they sure didn’t feel like it those nights… I felt so alone, so vulnerable, so trapped.”

Of course, it is ultimately up to the prosecution to decide which witnesses to call, and there is no guarantee that either Theron or Hayek will actually be asked to testify. But their inclusion on the list of possible witnesses is a reminder of the widespread impact that Weinstein’s alleged crimes have had on the entertainment industry.

As the trial continues, the world will be watching to see how it unfolds. And as more and more people come forward with their own stories of harassment and assault, Theron, Hayek, and others like them may play a crucial role in ensuring that justice is served.