As the holiday season comes to an end, many Americans will be struggling with the aftermath of overspending. A survey conducted by Magnify Money revealed that the average American added $1,325 in credit card debt during the 2019 holiday season alone, and with the ongoing economic uncertainty, the 2020 season is unlikely to be any less stressful for many. If you find yourself grappling with holiday credit card debt, don't panic: there are steps you can take to pay it off efficiently and minimize the damage to your credit score.

1. Start by making a budget. It may seem obvious, but figuring out how much money you have to work with is the first step in paying off your debt. Look at your income and expenses and determine how much you can realistically afford to put towards your debt each month. Set yourself a deadline for paying off the debt and create a schedule for making payments.

2. Prioritize your debts. If you have multiple credit cards with balances, focus on paying off the one with the highest interest rate first. This will save you money in the long run and help you make faster progress towards paying off your debt. Make minimum payments on your other cards while you focus on paying down the one with the highest interest.

3. Cut back on expenses. Your budgeting efforts will be in vain if you don't cut back on spending. Evaluate your current spending habits and look for ways to reduce expenses. This may mean cutting back on dining out, entertainment, or non-essential purchases. Even small cuts can add up and free up extra money to use towards paying off your debt.

4. Consider a balance transfer. If you have a high-interest credit card balance, you may be able to transfer it to a lower interest card. Many credit card providers offer promotional 0% APR periods for balance transfers, which could save you interest and give you more time to pay off your debt. Be sure to read the terms and conditions carefully, as balance transfer fees and other charges may apply.

5. Don't close your accounts. It may be tempting to close your credit card accounts once you pay them off, but this could actually hurt your credit score. Your credit utilization ratio (the amount of credit you're using compared to your total available credit) will increase if you close accounts, which can reduce your credit score. Instead, consider keeping the accounts open but cutting up the cards or locking them away to avoid future temptation.

Paying off holiday credit card debt can be a challenging process, but it's important to take it seriously and make progress as quickly as possible. With budgeting, prioritization, expense cutting, balance transfers, and careful account management, you can successfully pay off your debt and move forward with your financial goals.