Representative Phil Roe of Tennessee, a Republican who has been serving in Congress for over a decade, has recently announced his retirement from the House of Representatives. The news comes as a surprise to many, particularly as Roe has been a staunch supporter of President Trump and his policies.

Roe, who is 74 years old, made the announcement on Friday, saying that he would not seek re-election in 2020. During his time in Congress, Roe served as the chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, a position that allowed him to have a significant impact on the lives of veterans across the country.

In his announcement, Roe cited his desire to spend more time with his family as the primary reason for his retirement. He also explained that he felt he had accomplished nearly all he set out to do during his time in Congress, including passing legislation that he believes has made a significant difference in the lives of Americans.

While his colleagues on both sides of the aisle have expressed admiration for Roe and his commitment to public service, some have also noted that his retirement will be a loss for the Republican Party. Roe has been a steadfast supporter of President Trump and his policies, particularly in the areas of tax reform and border security.

Despite Roe's support for President Trump, however, he has also been willing to cross party lines when he believes it is in the best interest of his constituents. For example, he has worked closely with Democrats to pass legislation that provides additional resources to veterans suffering from conditions such as PTSD and traumatic brain injuries.

As the 2020 election draws nearer, Republicans will be eager to find a candidate who can fill the shoes of a respected member of their party like Roe. At the same time, Democrats will be hoping to capitalize on any potential weaknesses in the Republican ranks to increase their chances of flipping the seat.

Regardless of who ultimately takes Roe's place in Congress, however, his retirement marks the end of an era for Tennessee politics. As one of the most influential members of the state's congressional delegation, Roe leaves behind a legacy of public service that will not soon be forgotten.