On Monday morning, the New York Times reported a tragedy that took place over the weekend: two-month-old twins died in a city-funded homeless shelter in the Bronx. The details of this heartbreaking story are as follows:

On Saturday, the twins' father, whom the Times did not name, found them unconscious and unresponsive in their crib. He immediately called for help, but by the time emergency medical services arrived, it was too late: one of the twins was dead, and the other died shortly after being rushed to the hospital. 

The causes of the babies' deaths are not yet clear, but officials have launched an investigation. In the meantime, the family has been moved to another shelter, and their two other children, who did not require medical attention, have been placed in the care of a family member. 

The tragedy of these deaths is compounded by the fact that they occurred in a homeless shelter. New York City has a massive homelessness crisis - more than 60,000 people are currently living in shelters, according to the Department of Homeless Services - but this doesn't make it any less heartbreaking when homeless families experience loss or tragedy. 

Moreover, shelters can be dangerous places for infants and children. Back in 2016, the Daily News reported that New York City's shelters were plagued with a slew of problems, from vermin infestations to faulty heating systems to, yes, deaths of children. There are rules in place to try to protect families and children in shelters - for instance, the city is required to inspect shelters every year, and there are certain conditions that are supposed to trigger an immediate inspection - but it's clear that those rules aren't always enough to keep people safe. 

This recent tragedy is a reminder that homelessness is not just a political talking point or an economic problem to be solved - it's a reality that affects real people's lives. We don't yet know the full story behind the deaths of these two infants in the Bronx, but whatever the cause, their passing is a grievous loss. Our hearts go out to their family and friends.