Julián Castro, former mayor of San Antonio and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under President Obama, was considered a promising candidate for the Democratic nomination for president. He was one of the first to declare his candidacy, and although he was not among the front-runners, he managed to stand out at the Democratic debates.

But despite his credentials, Castro failed to gain significant support from Latino voters - a group that many expected would embrace him. In the end, he dropped out of the race in early January, citing a lack of financial support.

Some have blamed the media, citing a lack of attention given to Latino candidates in general. However, others have pointed to a number of factors that could help explain Castro's difficulties with Latino voters.

One possible explanation is that Castro struggled to connect with younger Latinos, many of whom are more progressive and wanted a more radical approach to policy. Casto had sharpened his speeches during the debates, focused on inclusiveness and multi-racial aspects of the Latino Democrat, in a way that could have felt outdated for younger Latinos demanding enacting the most progressive policies. Many young Latino voters felt that Castro was no different from other establishment candidates, and they therefore gravitated to candidates like Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren.

Another factor that influenced the Latino voters was a fear of wasting their vote on candidates who were never going to have a chance to win. After all, many voters want to select a candidate who can actually make a difference in the upcoming general election. This calculation led some Latino voters to support other candidates-- ones they considered more viable, leaving Castro behind.

Additionally, many Latino voters felt that they could not trust Castro because he had not done enough to improve the lives of Latino families when he was Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. He did not show the kind of genuine connection with the Latino community that could have made a difference.

These factors contributed to Castro's struggle to establish a foothold among Latino voters, and this failure ultimately doomed his campaign. Nonetheless, Castro’s campaign trail opened a new door for other Latinx candidates not to replicate Castro’s mistakes and to focus precisely in the areas where Castro didn’t.