Opinion | Mr. McConnell, It’s Time to Hear From John Bolton

In the ongoing impeachment trial of President Trump, the Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell, has made it clear that he does not intend to call witnesses, despite significant evidence indicating that the president acted improperly with regard to Ukraine.

One key witness who has yet to testify in the trial is John Bolton, the former national security adviser to President Trump. Bolton has indicated that he is willing to testify if subpoenaed by the Senate, but McConnell has refused to allow such a subpoena to be issued.

This is a mistake. If McConnell truly wants to conduct a fair trial that gets to the truth of what happened with regard to Ukraine, he must allow Bolton to testify.

The evidence we have seen so far suggests that President Trump pressured Ukraine to investigate his political rival, Joe Biden, in exchange for military aid. This would be a clear abuse of power, and one that deserves to be thoroughly investigated by Congress.

Bolton could provide crucial testimony in this matter. As someone who was present at many of the key meetings and discussions related to Ukraine policy, he likely has important first-hand knowledge of what went on behind the scenes.

Additionally, Bolton has already indicated that he had serious concerns about the president's actions with regard to Ukraine. In his upcoming memoir, he reportedly writes that President Trump explicitly told him that he was withholding the military aid in order to pressure Ukraine to investigate Joe Biden. This would be powerful evidence that could further bolster the case for impeachment.

Given all of this, it is difficult to see why McConnell would not want to hear from Bolton. If the Senate truly wants to conduct a fair trial, then it should allow all relevant witnesses to testify, including Bolton.

Of course, it is possible that Bolton's testimony could hurt the president's case. But the point of a trial is not to protect the president or any other individual. The point is to get to the truth, whatever that may be.

If McConnell truly believes in the rule of law and the importance of conducting a fair trial, he must call John Bolton to testify. Anything less would be a betrayal of his duty as a senator and as an American.