On October 14th, 2017, a devastating bombing rocked the Somali capital of Mogadishu, leaving over 500 people dead and injuring more than 300 others. This bombing, claimed by the extremist group Al-Shabaab, was one of the deadliest attacks to ever hit Somalia. Among the victims were some of the “best and brightest” citizens of the country.

It is important to understand that Somalia has been plagued with instability and violence for decades. In the midst of this, there are individuals who persist in working towards a better future for their country. Many of these individuals were tragically killed in the Mogadishu bombing.

Osman Dubbe was one such individual. Dubbe was a young entrepreneur and founder of the tech company Galkaio Technologies. He was seen as a rising star in the tech industry and had dreams of using his company to create jobs and lift people out of poverty. His death is a great loss to the Somali business community and to those who believed in his vision.

Another victim was Abdulkadir Abdirahman. Abdirahman was a well-known pharmacist in Mogadishu and was responsible for running one of the few pharmacies in the city that provided free medicine to those who could not afford it. He was often praised for his generosity and kindness towards his patients. His death not only robbed the community of a caring and compassionate individual but left many without access to essential medication.

These are just two examples of the many lives lost in the Mogadishu bombing. Their deaths are a tragedy for all who knew them and for the future of Somalia. The individuals who were killed were working towards building a brighter future for their country, and their loss is felt keenly by those who remain.

It is important to remember that events like these have a ripple effect that extends beyond just those who were directly impacted. Families, friends, and communities are left to pick up the pieces and try to move on in the aftermath. Somali citizens continue to mourn and demand justice for the victims and their families.

In the face of such devastating violence, it is important to remember that there are still those who work tirelessly for the good of their country. While their loss is great, their spirit lives on in the determination of those who remain to continue the fight for a better Somalia.