The Harvey Weinstein scandal became a hot topic of conversation after The New York Times published an investigative article about the sexual misconduct allegations that had been circulating about the powerful film producer for years. In their article, published on October 5th, 2017, journalists Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey revealed that Weinstein had settled numerous sexual harassment cases throughout his career, and had paid off at least eight women to keep quiet about his inappropriate behavior.

The Times' coverage of the Weinstein scandal was widely praised for its thoroughness and attention to detail. The article was the result of months of painstaking work by Kantor and Twohey, who conducted dozens of interviews with current and former Weinstein employees, as well as with the women who had come forward with allegations against him.

The impact of the article cannot be overstated. Almost immediately, Weinstein was fired from his own production company, and more and more women began to come forward with their own stories of sexual harassment and assault at the hands of powerful men in entertainment and other industries. The Times' coverage of the Weinstein scandal has been credited with helping to spark a national conversation about sexual harassment and assault, and with creating a platform for survivors to speak out.

But the Times' work on the Weinstein story didn't end with its initial article. Over the following weeks and months, the paper continued to report on the fallout from the scandal, as more women stepped forward and more executives were held accountable for their own misdeeds. The Times' reporters conducted interviews with Weinstein's accusers, tracked the progress of lawsuits filed against him, and covered the protests and marches that arose in response to the allegations.

In the end, the Weinstein scandal was a defining moment for The New York Times, which demonstrated its commitment to thorough, ethical journalism and its willingness to tackle tough subjects in the face of powerful opposition. The Times' coverage of the scandal has helped to set the tone for reporting on sexual harassment and assault in the years since, and has inspired countless journalists to take on other stories that shine a light on the abuse of power.