The battle between organizations and the Internet Society over the control of .org domain extension is heating up. The debate that started in November 2019 has been intensifying with every passing day. On one side is the Public Interest Registry (PIR), a non-profit organization that operates .org domain extension. On the other hand, there is the Internet Society, another non-profit organization that has been the owner of the PIR since 2002.

For years, .org has been the domain extension of choice for non-profits around the world. Its association with charitable works and non-profit organizations has made it a trusted brand for end-users. However, with the sale of PIR to a private equity firm, Ethos Capital, the future of .org is now uncertain.

Many non-profit organizations are against the sale of the Public Interest Registry. They believe that a non-profit organization should be the one that controls the .org extension. They fear that a for-profit corporation might put profitability ahead of the public good. They argue that Ethos Capital, as a for-profit corporation, will raise the cost of domain names to increase its profits.

Additionally, the sale of .org to Ethos Capital might result in more internet censorship. Many non-profit organizations that use .org domain extension are those that promote democracy, freedom of speech, and human rights. They fear that Ethos Capital might censor their content if it conflicts with its interests.

The battle between Ethos Capital and non-profit organizations has taken a political turn. Recently, Senator Ron Wyden (D-Ore) and a group of lawmakers wrote to Ethos Capital, urging the company to abandon its plan to purchase PIR. They also wrote to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the internet’s governing body, to investigate the sale of .org. The letter accused Ethos Capital of profiting from a public asset and of enriching itself while undermining public trusts.

In response to criticisms, Ethos Capital has promised a fair and reasonable pricing structure for .org domain extension and pledged not to engage in censorship practices. Ethos argued that the sale of PIR would lead to increased investment in .org domain extension and more resources for non-profits.

The future of .org is uncertain, and the battle is far from over. The danger for non-profit organizations is that the loss of .org will harm their branding and fundraising capabilities. Supporters of the sale argue that it will allow PIR to invest in new technologies and provide greater value to customers.

In conclusion, the fate of .org is now in the hands of ICANN, which has been examining the sale of PIR. The question is whether ICANN will approve the sale of .org to a for-profit corporation, or whether it will heed the concerns of non-profit organizations and block the sale. In the meantime, the battle between Ethos Capital and non-profit organizations will continue to unfold.