As America ushers in a new decade, it’s clear that the tech industry’s challenges with Washington aren’t going anywhere. From antitrust investigations to data privacy concerns, the tech giants continue to be scrutinized, and the week in tech has been no exception.

The week started with news that the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is planning to look into the acquisitions made by big tech companies in the last decade. This could spell trouble for Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and Google, which have all made numerous acquisitions. The investigation is aimed at understanding whether these acquisitions have been hindering competition.

The investigation has come just as the tech industry is dealing with a considerable blow, with the Supreme Court declining to hear an appeal in a case where wireless carriers were accused of colluding to drive up the price of text messages. The decision means that the carriers will have to pay millions in damages to consumers, posing a fresh challenge to an industry already grappling with privacy concerns.

Elsewhere, Facebook has been facing scrutiny about its role in the spread of misinformation ahead of the US President's 2020 election. This past week, the social media giant announced that it will be banning "deepfakes," or manipulated videos, in an attempt to curtail the spread of misinformation. Although, critics have argued that such a move may not be enough to stop the spread of fake news.

Meanwhile, another data scandal has hit Google, with the company admitting that it inadvertently shared the private data of some Google Photos users with other users. This is just the latest in a long line of data breaches and privacy scandals that have dogged the tech giant over the last few years, raising questions about the amount of data tech companies should be allowed to gather.

As we move into a new decade, it’s clear that the tech industry’s challenges aren’t going away anytime soon. The coming years will witness a growing push for regulations that would limit the power of tech giants, and the pressure from consumers and lawmakers is unlikely to decrease. In the end, it will be up to tech companies to find a way to operate within the rules and create products that benefit the public while avoiding the pitfalls of unchecked growth and power.