As the United States gears up for the presidential election this fall, it is worth asking whether we can afford to have Donald J. Trump as our commander in chief for another four years. The answer, overwhelmingly, is no.

Trump’s record as commander in chief has been disastrous. From his haphazard approach to foreign policy and his disregard for our military leadership, to his refusal to take seriously the threats posed by Russia and other hostile powers, Trump has demonstrated time and again that he is incapable of leading our country through dangerous times.

Perhaps the most glaring example of Trump’s deficiencies as a commander in chief is his handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Throughout the crisis, Trump has downplayed the severity of the virus, ignored the advice of medical experts, and failed to provide our health care workers with the resources and support they need to fight the disease. As a result, the United States has suffered more than 200,000 deaths and millions of job losses, and our economy is in shambles.

Furthermore, Trump’s recklessness has put our national security at risk. He has shown a disturbing affinity for authoritarian leaders, including Vladimir Putin of Russia and Kim Jong-un of North Korea, while alienating our closest allies. His policies have emboldened China and Iran, while weakening our ability to confront these threats.

Perhaps most worrying of all is the damage Trump has done to our democracy itself. His attacks on the free press, his efforts to undermine the legitimacy of our elections, and his contempt for the rule of law have eroded the institutions that make our country strong. If we continue down this path, we risk losing the very foundations of our democracy.

Given these immense challenges, we simply cannot afford to have Trump as our commander in chief for another four years. We need a leader who can bring people together, restore our alliances, and protect our national security. We need a president who is willing to listen to experts, take responsibility for his actions, and put the interests of the American people first.

In November, we will have the opportunity to vote for such a leader. We encourage all Americans to exercise their right to vote and to support a candidate who has the experience, the judgment, and the temperament to serve as commander in chief. We cannot afford to do otherwise. The stakes are simply too high.