The High Line, a former rail line turned public park on the west side of Manhattan, has become one of New York City's most beloved public spaces. It's a place where locals and tourists alike can escape the bustle of the city and enjoy a bit of nature in the middle of an urban landscape. But the High Line is also known for its public art installations and exhibitions, which change with the seasons and often challenge viewers to think about their surroundings in new and different ways. 

This summer, the High Line has a new curator: playwright Lynn Nottage. Nottage is a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner and one of the most prominent voices in contemporary American theater. Her plays often focus on marginalized communities and explore issues of race, class, and gender. But the High Line is a departure from her usual creative space. 

So how did Nottage come to curate the High Line? According to an interview with The New York Times, she was approached by Cecilia Alemani, the park's chief curator, who was familiar with Nottage's work and wanted to bring an outsider's perspective to the space. Nottage was immediately intrigued by the challenge. 

The result is a new exhibition called "Broadway Billboard," which features large-scale images of billboards from Broadway shows. But these billboards are not your typical advertisements. Instead, they feature quotes from Nottage's plays, as well as lines from other influential playwrights. The idea is to create a dialogue between the world of theater and the urban landscape of the High Line. 

Nottage's goal with "Broadway Billboard" is to make theater more accessible to everyone. As she notes in The New York Times interview, "Theater often feels like an exclusive club that people need a special invitation to be a part of. But what if we could take some of that energy and bring it out into the world? What if we could invite people into the conversation in a more public way?" 

By placing these quotes on billboards in a public park, Nottage hopes to create a new kind of theatrical experience. People can see the billboards as they walk along the High Line, but they can also sit and read the quotes, perhaps even having a conversation about what they mean. It's a way to engage with the public in a new and different way, and to challenge people's preconceptions about what theater is and who it's for. 

Of course, "Broadway Billboard" is just one small part of what the High Line offers. But it's an important part, because it shows how the park can be a platform for new and innovative ideas. By bringing in a playwright like Lynn Nottage, who is known for pushing boundaries and challenging assumptions, the High Line is helping to redefine what a public space can be. 

If you're in New York City this summer, be sure to check out "Broadway Billboard" on the High Line. It's a chance to see theater in a whole new way, and to experience the city in a way that will leave you feeling inspired and energized.