As 2019 comes to a close, it's time to make some fearless predictions for the National Basketball Association (NBA) in 2020. From superstars to rookies, there are a handful of things that are likely to happen in the NBA. Here are five predictions for the NBA in 2020.

1. LeBron James will lead the Los Angeles Lakers to the NBA finals

After a disappointing 2018-2019 season, the Los Angeles Lakers have bounced back in a big way. LeBron James, who missed significant time last season due to injury, has shown no signs of slowing down in his 17th year in the league. With the addition of Anthony Davis during the offseason, the Lakers have one of the best duos in the league. With strong performances from role players like Kentavious Caldwell-Pope and Kyle Kuzma, the Lakers are poised to make a deep playoff run in 2020.

2. The Milwaukee Bucks will have the best record in the league

The Milwaukee Bucks had the best record in the league last season, and there's a good chance that they'll repeat that performance in 2020. Reigning MVP Giannis Antetokounmpo has continued to improve in nearly every aspect of his game, and the Bucks have added veteran players like Wesley Matthews and Kyle Korver to their roster. The Bucks will be a force to be reckoned with this season.

3. The New York Knicks will make the playoffs for the first time since 2013

It's been a rough few years for the New York Knicks, but 2020 could be the year that they turn things around. The Knicks have a young, talented core of players like Julius Randle, RJ Barrett, and Mitchell Robinson. Plus, they've added veterans like Taj Gibson and Marcus Morris to provide leadership and stability. With the Eastern Conference in a state of flux, there's a chance that the Knicks could sneak into the playoffs this season.

4. Zion Williamson will win Rookie of the Year

There's been a lot of hype surrounding Zion Williamson since before he was even drafted, and he's done nothing to disappoint so far. Williamson has shown an impressive combination of size, athleticism, and skill during preseason games, and he already looks like one of the best players on the New Orleans Pelicans roster. There are a handful of talented rookies entering the league this season, but Williamson should be the favorite to take home the Rookie of the Year award.

5. The Houston Rockets will make a deep playoff run

The Houston Rockets have been one of the best teams in the league over the past few years, but they've fallen short in the playoffs. This year could be different. The addition of Russell Westbrook to the Rockets' roster gives them one of the most dynamic backcourts in the league, and James Harden remains one of the best offensive players in the game. With the right mix of role players, the Rockets could finally make a deep playoff run in 2020.

These predictions may be bold, but anything can happen in the NBA. With so many talented players and teams in the league, 2020 is sure to bring plenty of surprises, upsets, and unforgettable moments.