In the highly contested race for the Democratic presidential nominee, Senator Elizabeth Warren’s stance on “Medicare for All” has shifted. The progressive senator from Massachusetts was a vocal proponent of the ambitious healthcare plan championed by Senator Bernie Sanders, but now seems to be backing away from it.

Warren has dodged the question about “Medicare for All” in recent debates and interviews, focusing on other policies such as climate change and workers’ rights. In a recent town hall in New Hampshire, when asked about the issue, Warren responded by saying "I have a plan to expand Medicare and make it available to everyone who wants it… I think right now what we need to do is protect the Affordable Care Act."

This shift in Warren’s stance on healthcare has not gone unnoticed by her competitors. While Senators Sanders and Kamala Harris are still advocating for “Medicare for All,” some of Warren’s opponents are using her change of rhetoric against her.

Former vice president Joe Biden, for example, has criticized Warren for not being transparent enough about how she plans to pay for healthcare reform. “It’s fascinating that the person who has a plan for everything has no plan for the single most consequential issue in this election in the minds of the American people across the board,” he said at a recent campaign stop.

Warren’s change in rhetoric could be a strategic move to garner support from moderate Democrats and independents who may be hesitant to fully embrace Sanders’ bold and expensive healthcare plan. She may also be trying to appeal to those who are satisfied with the current system, but want to see it improved.

Whatever the reason behind Warren’s shift, it’s clear that the issue of healthcare will continue to be a significant focus of the Democratic primary race. As the field narrows, the candidates’ plans for healthcare reform will become more closely scrutinized by voters. And while Warren may not be talking about “Medicare for All” much right now, it’s likely it will continue to be a prominent issue in the race for the Democratic nomination.