Lesson of the Day: ‘“It’s an Atomic Bomb”: Australia Deploys Military as Fires Spread’
Featured Article: “‘It’s an Atomic Bomb’: Australia Deploys Military as Fires Spread”
The exceptionally brutal wildfires affecting Australia have so far consumed an area larger than Switzerland, killing 24 people since October and prompting thousands of evacuations from communities along the southeastern coast.
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the damage these fires have caused, how they’re being fought, and the effects they’re having on people and wildlife. Then, you’ll come up with your own ways to raise awareness about the natural disaster in your community.
Before reading today’s featured article, take a few minutes to explore one or more of the pieces below that illustrate the devastation the Australian wildfires have caused so far:
As you view these resources, write down three things that stand out to you, two reactions you have, and one question you want to ask. Then, share and explain your responses with a partner.
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. What damage have the wildfires in Australia caused so far?
2. Who has been fighting the fires? In what ways is the Australian government now contributing to these efforts and why?
3. What is the relationship between the extreme weather conditions in Australia and these wildfires? How is climate change contributing, if at all?
4. “If this is the new normal, then that model is broken,” John Blaxland, a professor at the Strategic and Defense Studies Center at the Australian National University, said about the military’s ability to handle a looming climate crisis. Why does he believe this? Cite at least three pieces of evidence from the article that support his claim.
5. The authors note that about 87 percent of Australia’s wildlife is endemic to the country. What does “endemic” mean in this context? Why are wildfires a particular threat to these species?
6. What mental and emotional toll are the fires taking on residents? Select one quote from the article that you think represents their experience and explain why.
7. What detail or details from this article resonated with you the most? Why?
Images can be powerful tools for raising awareness, especially when it comes to natural disasters like the wildfires in Australia. Imagine you wanted to share an image on social media to help people in your community understand what is happening in Australia and inspire them to take action.
Option 1: Select a photo or graphic from one of the articles you explored in this lesson that you think would spark a strong reaction among people in your community. Then, explain in writing how you think it could help bring attention to this crisis.
Option 2: Better yet, create your own image using the information from the article or further research. You can use illustrations, words, graphs, comparisons, or anything else that you think would be effective. Here are some ideas to get your wheels turning:
If you want to take this activity a step further, post your image to Instagram or whatever social media you use, and see what kind of response you get. Then, reflect on the experience and share what you discovered with your classmates.