Who Cares About One Missing Child in an Indian Slum? Another Child
DJINN PATROL ON THE PURPLE LINE
By Deepa Anappara

Perhaps the most trenchantly portrayed boy in India is Apu, the character at the center of Satyajit Ray’s famed film trilogy. Its first installment, “Pather Panchali,” or “Song of the Little Road,” burst onto the world cinema scene in 1955 and remains a masterpiece. It was based on another “first,” the debut novel of the same name, originally published in 1929 by Bhibuti Bashan Banerjee, which depicted Apu and his family in their village in rural Bengal. The book ends in a railroad station as they board a train to find a better life in a hectic city.
The “Purple Line” of Deepa Anappara’s first novel is a metro system in another imaginary Indian city, and the book opens along its tracks, as seen from the perspective of a group of street boys. The focus then tightens, bringing us the story through the eyes of a 9-year-old named Jai who lives in a basti, an impoverished colony that abuts the railway line. In Jai, Anappara has created a boy vivid in his humanity, one whose voice somersaults on the page.
Rich with easy joy, Anappara’s writing announces the arrival of a literary supernova. Even before she had finished “Djinn Patrol on the Purple Line,” her novel-in-progress had won three literary awards. In the glowing reviews that are sure to come, no doubt much will be made of the fact that Anappara started out as a journalist in Mumbai and Delhi; her storytelling genius, it might be assumed, must be rooted in her reporter’s eye for detail. But that handy formula misses the heat and mystery of what Anappara creates. (Warning: If you begin reading the book in the morning, don’t expect to get anything done for the rest of the day.)
Telling a story from the perspective of a child always risks a descent into sentimentality. There’s not a lick of it here. Some of that has to do with the novel’s subject: the unexplained disappearance of several children from the basti where Jai lives with his sister and parents. The first to go missing is Jai’s classmate. An asthmatic stutterer, Bahadur is the oldest son of a man called Drunkard Laloo, a “beggy-type fellow” who stumbles around the basti, “drool dripping from his mouth, doing nothing but eating air.” It falls to Bahadur’s mother to be the breadwinner, working as a nanny for a family in one of the skyscraper condos Jai calls “hi-fi buildings” that loom luxuriously over the shacks of the basti. It’s said that she had to leave her son in his father’s desultory care when she accompanied her employers on a weeklong vacation in Rajasthan. When she returns, her son is gone.
The obvious next step would be to call the police. But, as anyone who has read “Behind the Beautiful Forevers,” Katherine Boo’s nonfiction account of a Mumbai slum, knows, the Indian police are corrupt in ways that can be tragicomically perverse. In a failed effort to trigger a bona fide investigation, the missing boy’s mother tries to bribe a constable with the 24-karat gold chain “her madam” had given her as a gift. Jai’s mother, who also works as a servant, cleaning the flat of a “hi-fi madam,” becomes convinced that going to the police will draw attention to the illegality of the basti’s dwellings. But Jai’s father, a construction worker who helped complete the nearby Purple Line metro station, reasons that the gift of the gold chain will protect them. And besides, “if the police demolish our basti, where will they get bribes from?”
In “Pather Panchali,” Apu is fascinated by nature. For Jai, who lives in a smog-blanketed city much like New Delhi, it’s the small television inside his one-room shanty that captures his imagination. His favorite shows are “Police Patrol” and “Live Crime.” Sometimes his mother turns them off in the middle of a murder because “it’s too sick-making.” But more often she watches with him and calls the policemen “sons-of-owls” for being so slow to catch the criminals. Since the authorities couldn’t care less about Bahadur, Jai decides to investigate his classmate’s disappearance himself.
Before Jai’s jumble-tumble of an investigation can begin, the novel’s perspective shifts again as Anappara takes us, for one chapter, inside the head of the missing boy and reveals how far from the truth the basti’s gossip really is. Since he was 7 years old, Bahadur has been sleeping outside in the alleys of a nearby bazaar whenever his mother is forced to stay overnight “to care for madam’s feverish child or to serve guests at a party.”
His mother thought he was safe in the homes of neighborhood aunties, but when their children teased him about his stutter he roamed the bazaar instead. The owner of an electronics repair shop discovered the boy’s talent and gave him a job, telling him he was smart enough to be an engineer. But the boy is still haunting the alleys because his drunken father beats him. As the chapter ends, he hears “the slow footsteps of something or someone he was certain was coming toward him.”
As I read this chapter and the ones that follow, I was reminded of James Wood’s “How Fiction Works” and the remark he makes in his discussion of “What Maisie Knew” — that in telling the story from a child’s vantage point, Henry James allows the reader to “live inside her confusion” but also gives us writing that’s “so flexible, so capable of inhabiting different levels of comprehension and irony.” Anappara improvises further still, inhabiting the inner world not just of one child but of a growing number of children who are lost to their families.
Jai returns to narrate most of the book as he and his two best friends embark on their “detectiving.” Faiz believes that a djinn has taken their missing friend into an underground cave and eaten him. Pari, studious and confident, rolls her eyes at Faiz’s superstitions. Jai’s sister, a talented sprinter who sees winning a championship as her way of escaping the slum, covers for her little brother’s unexplained absences as he tries to locate the abductors. Along the way, the secret recesses of the basti’s collective morality are probed and we gradually realize that the simplistic police procedurals Jai has such faith in can’t explain why some children are lost and others escape by a thread.
We marvel at those threads, so vibrantly woven by Anappara, as Jai tracks down the missing children’s families and friends, only to discover that even those closest to them have little understanding of their true selves. This is the power of this novel, how it keeps us grounded — not in the flats of the hi-fi dwellers but in something closer to India’s heart, which she locates in the minds of children with bony shoulders and dirty feet.