Does Iowa Deserve Its Leading Role?
To the Editor:
Re “Iowa Should Never Go First Again,” by David Leonhardt (column, Jan. 27):
Thank you, Mr. Leonhardt, for your column on the absurdity of how we choose presidential candidates. Why should Iowa and New Hampshire go first with caucuses and a primary? They should not. As you point out, they do not represent American demographics.
But I go further with my suggestions for change. We should have nationally consistent rules for primaries among states. These are candidates for national office, not for statewide office, and there are ludicrous inconsistencies among states’ primary election rules.
Further, why should primary dates be serialized state by state at all? There was once a reason, but with today’s rapid travel and communication it is anachronistic. It enables candidates to pander to narrow constituencies, then switch their positions to pander to a different state’s voters.
If we want honest candidates for national office who reflect broad appeal among the nation’s voters, let’s have a National Primary Day, with national rules.
Michael T. Ferro
Endwell, N.Y.
To the Editor:
I certainly hope that David Leonhardt does not think the typical Iowan wants to keep the state’s “first in the nation” status. Many of us (most?) loathe it. We get year-round campaign commercials, telephone calls and those obsequious visits by politicians and would-be politicians — year after year.
We know we should not be first. Diversity is not adequately represented by Iowa’s caucuses. So please, take it away. Let another state enjoy first in the nation status. They can learn to loathe it, too.
Robert Chittenden
Hudson, Iowa
To the Editor:
David Leonhardt is correct when he argues that the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary afford those two states an unfair and disproportionate amount of influence in the presidential nominating process. I disagree, however, regarding the reasoning behind his conclusion.
While the demographics and racial and ethnic makeup of those two states have received much attention, it is their relatively small populations that are at the root of their unfair influence. A more democratic solution would be to implement a regional primary system in which larger, more representative percentages of the entire voting population could participate.
Dean R. Brown
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
To the Editor:
The remedy that comes most readily to mind for the current travesty of democratic values is a rotating roster of the first two caucus or primary locations.
To inaugurate this formula without excessive disruption to past practice, yet another caucus in a Midwestern state could fit the bill. Kansas, for example, while slightly smaller than Iowa in terms of total population, has a larger population of African-Americans and Latinos.
Iowa and New Hampshire need not worry that a rotating location of states will prevent a return to their cherished status. The only difference will be that they might have to wait a couple of hundred years.
John Mellana
Seattle
To the Editor:
If there were a huge advantage to winning the Iowa caucus or the New Hampshire primary, perhaps their going first and second would be a form of white privilege. But in the last 40 years, very little has been decided in these two states. About as many losers as winners have gone on to win their party’s nomination (apart from incumbent presidents who always get the party’s nod in these early states).
Paul Greenberg
Brookline, Mass.