Make Republicans Uncomfortable
This article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.
There are two competing explanations for Mitch McConnell’s abrupt change in the length of the impeachment trial (to three days, from two).
One is that Republican senators facing tough elections this year didn’t like the perception that they were supporting a sham trial and forced McConnell to make the change. “The fact that McConnell had to make significant changes to rules just before the vote suggests he has less control over the trial than widely believed,” Judd Legum, author of the Popular Information newsletter, wrote.
The other is that the whole thing was a set-up. Josh Schwerin, a Democratic strategist and former congressional aide, wrote: “Mitch McConnell intentionally gave his vulnerable members a win on process. This was probably the plan from the beginning. It cost him nothing.”
Either way, the message is the same. Senate Republicans aren’t going to hold President Trump accountable for repeatedly violating his oath of office, but they are worried about a perception among swing voters that they are pushovers.
That worry points toward the best strategy for Democrats to follow: Hammer home a few simple story lines about Trump and his enablers. He is using the powers of his office to benefit himself and is damaging the national interest, and Republican senators are covering up for him.
Democrats did a good job yesterday. Representative Adam Schiff was effective in using his time — ostensibly to argue about a technical rules issue — to lay out a much larger case. As the political journalist Jon Ward wrote: “I sat in chamber for entire Schiff speech. That was a mauling. Trump team thought they were there to debate process and Schiff ambushed them with a full-throated case for impeachment. Republicans were visibly uncomfortable.”
That’s the Democrats’ only hope at this stage. Take their case to the American people, and make Republicans uncomfortable.
For more …