I Read 4,800 Pages of American History Textbooks
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
For the past five months, my small cubicle has been clogged with an unusual sight in a newsroom: 43 middle school and high school American history textbooks.
Colleagues walking by would often grimace and say something like: “Ugh. This reminds me of studying for the A.P. U.S. History exam.”
But as an education reporter on the National desk, I relished the painstaking task I had set out for myself: reading about 4,800 pages of mostly sterile, written-by-committee prose to figure out what American teenagers are learning about our nation’s history in this deeply divided time, and how those lessons differ across the country.
(A colleague on the desk, Adeel Hassan, offered a crucial assist by reading and taking notes on an additional 1,600 pages.)
I embarked on this project after reporting on how difficult it had been for policymakers in a single state — Michigan — to come to a consensus on how to teach American history. I wondered how this politicized process was playing out in other places across the country, and within the halls of textbook publishing companies.
We decided to focus on four sets of textbooks from three of the nation’s major educational publishers: McGraw-Hill, Pearson and Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Each of the books had a recently published edition customized for students in Texas and another edition customized for students in California, allowing us to see how a conservative and a liberal state are teaching history differently.
I would set the two editions out on a table, side by side, and read through them paragraph by paragraph in tandem, turning the pages slowly. Each time I came across a notable difference between the two states’ books — and there were hundreds — I would record it in an ever-expanding Google document. The work could leave me bleary-eyed.
With immense help from our design team, the findings were laid out in an investigative article that includes annotated excerpts from California and Texas textbooks presented side by side, so readers can compare them like I did. I also interviewed teachers from both states about how their real lesson plans echoed or differed from the information in textbooks.
The differences between the textbooks involved some of the most meaningful and contentious historical legacies in American life: the depth of white resistance to black progress after the Civil War; interpretations of the Second Amendment; the benefits and drawbacks of capitalism; the extent of discrimination against L.G.B.T.Q. Americans; and the impact of immigration.
These different shadings of American history were shaped by partisan politics. In Texas, curriculum standards were set by a Republican-dominated state Board of Education that, in turn, appointed teachers, parents and even an outspoken, socially conservative pastor to review textbook drafts.
In California, the process was completely dominated by Democrats, whose appointees, mostly professional educators, have produced what may be the most left-leaning set of curriculum standards in the nation, with new emphasis on L.G.B.T.Q. history, the labor movement and economic inequality.
That said, both states’ textbooks are far more complete depictions of American history than the ones I encountered in public high school two decades ago in Ossining, N.Y. — let alone the textbooks my parents or grandparents read.
For me, at age 35, the experience of reading the books was one of feeling deep regret over what I was not taught in school.
Both states emphasized the brutal displacement of Native Americans as the United States fulfilled its “Manifest Destiny.” There were extended passages on the boarding schools where Native children, wrenched from their parents and tribes, were subjected to forced linguistic and cultural assimilation — something I did not learn about until college.
And books from the two states did not differ very much when it came to telling the story of slavery. The torture, disease and death of the Middle Passage, the plantation and the auction block were presented in much more vivid detail than I remembered from my own middle school years.
Overall, I was struck that there was not more information in the current K-12 curriculum on the role debates over slavery played in shaping founding documents like the U.S. Constitution. Some of the books lacked meaningful discussion of the fact that founding fathers like George Washington and Thomas Jefferson were slave owners.
About midway through my reporting process, I spent an afternoon a few blocks away from The Times’s headquarters at the stately New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue. There, I reviewed American history textbooks from the 1950s and 1960s. Their racism in depicting African-Americans, Chinese immigrants and Mexican-Americans was overt, a reminder of the vastly different history educations received by today’s adults — all of whom, from Generation Z to the Greatest Generation, will be eligible to vote in November 2020.
It was a reminder that the historical stories we tell have a profound impact on the world.