When Tom Steyer Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
Today on “The Choice,” the endorsement podcast from NYT Opinion, California businessman Tom Steyer’s interview with the editorial board. He’s running as the only Democratic candidate who understood how the economy works, and if net worth is any measure, he might be right. The board questioned why Steyer, a billionaire, is the best messenger for progressive economic change, and his claim that he is the top candidate to combat the climate crisis. Plus: union-busting, racism in America and a tense exchange on President Trump’s impeachment.
Then, tune in to the bonus deliberation episode, below, to hear the board’s reaction to Steyer’s interview, and for a conversation on the impact of Trump's impeachment and billionaires in the 2020 election.
To read the unabridged transcript from this interview with Tom Steyer, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the primary election candidates on the job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different Democratic candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Jan. 30, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to its decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the U.S.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and its endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | PocketCasts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey