Are the Iowa Caucuses Finally Canceled?
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Back in November, the Times reporters Sydney Ember and Reid J. Epstein wrote that “almost nobody” would defend the Iowa caucuses. After Monday night’s events, it’s safe to assume that almost nobody’s mind was changed: “A systemwide disaster” is how Derek Eadon, a former Iowa Democratic Party chairman, described the embarrassing imbroglio of technological malfunction and bureaucratic disorder that undermined trust in the state’s electoral system and, as of Tuesday evening, had yet to produce definitive results.
Why it’s important: Iowa awards just 41 out of the more than 1,900 delegates required to become the party nominee. But as the country’s first nomination contest, the caucuses are seen as a significant predictor of a candidate’s viability in the race writ large.
“Congratulations, Iowa. You played yourself,” tweeted Lyz Lenz, a resident of Iowa and a columnist at The Gazette. Here’s what people are saying about why the caucuses went wrong — and why, at least in their current form, they can’t go right.
The Iowa caucuses got their first-in-the-nation status in 1972, and traditionally each precinct has simply called in its results. This year, however, the Iowa Democratic Party commissioned Shadow Inc., a for-profit technology company, to build an app for tabulating and reporting the votes. Further complicating matters, precincts had to report three sets of data this year — the initial alignment of caucusgoers, the realignment of those with candidates below 15 percent support and then the final number of delegates won at each site — instead of one.
Precinct chairs apparently struggled to download and log in to the app, which had been put together in the past two months and had not been properly tested, creating widespread confusion.
The Shadow app raises serious questions about the effects of cellular and internet technologies on election security that the nation’s political institutions seem inadequately equipped to answer.
In Iowa, the process of choosing a candidate doesn’t resemble voting so much as it does a team sport, an exercise that is at worst fundamentally undemocratic and at best profoundly vexing for introverts.
The caucus is rife with strange, confusing rules, Mr. Leonhardt adds.
“You have a system that needs and wants to be better but is so trapped by its own power and influence that it can’t change,” writes Ms. Lenz. “And what’s more American than that?”
Iowa’s privileged status in the national presidential primaries was a source of contention long before Monday night’s debacle. In November, Julián Castro articulated perhaps the strongest case against it: that Iowa does not reflect “the diversity of our country.”
The state is too rural and far too white to wield such clout, Michelle Cottle, a member of the Times editorial board, has written. “This is a cliché because it is true. Demographically speaking, the Iowa electorate looks about as much like the face of America as does the Senate Republican conference.”
The only solution, Mr. Leonhardt argues, is to end Iowa’s special treatment. “Last night,” he writes, Iowa “botched its caucus when the entire nation was watching, giving the lie to the state’s longtime claim that it is better at conducting democracy than the rest of us.”
As Ms. Cottle has written, there are numerous alternative proposals for picking a candidate. (Here’s another one.) There will be time for the two parties and their voters to debate the comparative merits of such proposals. But for now, as the Times reporters Shane Goldmacher and Nick Corasaniti put it, “the only clear loser was Iowa.”
Do you have a point of view we missed? Email us at debatable@nytimes.com. Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
The most important Iowa result is in: mediocre turnout. [The Washington Post]
“Iowa Might Have Screwed Up The Whole Nomination Process.” [FiveThirtyEight]
“The Challenges of Caucusing with a Child” [WNYC]
“In defense of the Iowa caucuses.” [MinnPost]
Iowa is a myth. Should we believe in it? [The Washington Post]