On Politics: The Uncertainty Continues
No winner emerged from the Iowa caucuses last night. But, in the wee hours of the morning, at least one thing became official: In 2020, we cannot have nice things.
The state’s nominating contest descended into confusion and chaos on Monday, after “inconsistencies” in the reporting of results prompted the state Democratic Party to hold off on releasing any numbers.
Well after midnight, Iowa Democratic Party officials were matching paper worksheets by hand, according to a campaign official, turning to paper trails and photos to verify results from each of the state’s more than 1,600 precincts.
County chairs reported errors with an app, cobbled together by the party in the last two months, that was designed to report the results online. Fingers were pointed in all kinds of directions, including a false claim that Robby Mook, Hillary Clinton’s former campaign manager, was involved with the app. (We will never escape 2016!)
Others blamed Bernie Sanders and his campaign, which had pushed the party to report three separate numbers, saying those additional demands slowed the reporting of results to a crawl. “When people demand that we provide three times the data, I don’t think it’s unreasonable that it takes substantially longer to do it,” said Rob Sand, the Iowa state auditor.
Meanwhile, the process of reporting results sounded less like democracy in action and more like, well, calling your cable company. “Been on hold for three hours. Occasionally my call is dropped and I have to start over,” Zach Simonson, the Wapello County chair, told my colleague Nick Corasaniti.
As questions mounted, Democratic Party officials remained silent, doing little to quell the growing chaos. When pressed for a release time for results by campaign aides on a private conference call, party officials hung up. At 2 a.m., on a 45-second conference call, the head of the state party promised results later on Tuesday.
Clearly, something is not quite right in the state of Iowa.
For Iowa Democrats, the catastrophe is yet another blow to a caucus process that an increasingly vocal set of the party has come to see as exclusionary, antiquated and unrepresentative.
But for the campaigns, this is just another strange twist — in a political era that’s been defined by the unexpected — ready to be spun to their advantage.
Before jetting off to New Hampshire, a number of candidates declared victory.
Pete Buttigieg said Iowa had “shocked the nation” — but not because of all that can’t-quite-seem-to-run-an-election business.
“Tonight an improbable hope became an undeniable reality,” he said. “By all indications we are going on to New Hampshire victorious.”
Sanders told his supporters, “When those results are announced, I have a good feeling we’re going to be doing very, very well here in Iowa.”
Campaign aides rushed to fill the information void with flattering numbers. Buttigieg’s team quietly circulated statistics, saying its precinct captains had reported that he reached viability in 83 percent of the campaign’s reporting caucus sites. Amy Klobuchar's campaign manager said her team was running “even or ahead” of Joe Biden, citing numbers he’d seen “internally and publicly.” A top aide to Elizabeth Warren described the contest as a “close race” between Ms. Warren, Mr. Sanders and Mr. Buttigieg with Joe Biden “a distant fourth.”
Anecdotal reports showed the former vice president failing to meet that 15 percent viability threshold in suburban precincts around Des Moines — areas where he should have been competitive.
So perhaps it wasn’t that surprising when he took a slightly different approach from his rivals on Monday night, sending a letter to the state party that cited “considerable flaws” in the reporting system and pushed for the release of a lot more information before anyone can see the results.
Sometimes less can be more, even when it comes to the possibility of low turnout numbers.
Curious what happens next in Iowa? So are we!
We’ll post the latest numbers when they’re available. And read our recap of the results that weren’t.
Caucusgoers passed the time with a game of chess at Drake University’s Knapp Center in Des Moines.
Once we have results from Iowa, sights will turn toward New Hampshire, where primary voters go to the polls in exactly a week.
The results from Iowa can help sway New Hampshire voters — many of whom remain undecided — but a split decision between the two states is not uncommon. (Hillary Clinton won New Hampshire after losing Iowa in 2008, then did the exact opposite in 2016.)
Sanders beat Clinton handily there in 2016, and recent polling has shown him with a comfortable lead. A Boston Globe/Suffolk University survey taken this week put him six percentage points ahead of Biden, and more than 10 points up on both Warren and Buttigieg.
Still, each of the four leading candidates has devoted heaps of resources to New Hampshire, and all four have been somewhere near the top of the polls there at some point in the campaign. So the race could still go anybody’s way.
After New Hampshire, both the Nevada caucuses on Feb. 22 and the South Carolina primary on Feb. 29 will hinge on the decisions of nonwhite voters — who are underrepresented in the first two voting states.
Biden has long seen minority voters, and especially African-Americans, as some of his most reliable supporters. But Sanders has picked up steam among black voters recently, and he now leads among Latinos in most polls reporting results among this group. Entrance polls on Monday suggested Sanders had won nonwhite people by a wide margin in Iowa.
Perhaps you were wondering what we meant when we mentioned that Iowa Democratic Party officials were tallying results on paper worksheets.
Trip Gabriel, our man in Dubuque, has the scoop.
