‘Three Christs’ Review: Exploring the Mysteries of the Mind
In the late 1950s, the social psychologist Dr. Milton Rokeach took three paranoid schizophrenic men who all believed themselves to be Jesus Christ and brought them together, to see how they would react. His findings, about which even he eventually raised ethical qualms, weren’t limited to professional journals. The movie “Three Christs” is based on his book “The Three Christs of Ypsilanti,” published in 1964 and still in print. The story has been dramatized elsewhere, including onstage.
If the room where Rokeach and his three Christs met became a place for exploring the mysteries of the mind, the meeting space in the movie looks more like an acting class, in which three hams compete for a curtain call, each with his own performance style.
Peter Dinklage’s mental patient is a lordly, theatrical Christ, who speaks fondly of opera and England. Bradley Whitford, whose character identifies as Christ, but takes care to note he is not of Nazareth, is a disheveled, muttering widower whose schizophrenia seems hopelessly intermingled with the guilt he feels for his wife’s death. Even less kempt, Walton Goggins gets to play an angry, avenging figure, given to oratory and mind games. He is eager to challenge the good doctor — a psychiatrist here, called Alan Stone (Richard Gere) — and potentially dangerous to the therapist’s attractive research assistant, Becky (Charlotte Hope).
Rokeach, who died in 1988, ultimately said that the three Christs cured him of his “God-like delusion” that he could change them. The closing title cards of “Three Christs” spin that quote to make it sound a tad more uplifting, a contextual shift that perhaps describes the method of the movie. It has to solve the problem of how to compress difficult, messy material into a polished, crowd-pleasing drama.
Institutional resistance to Alan’s methods is mostly concentrated in the form of a jealous hospital superintendent (Kevin Pollak, giving it his full weasel) who undermines and meddles in Alan’s work. There is a sense that disparate events have smushed together: In a victory for multitasking, Alan decides to dose Becky with LSD while they are observing their patients — and just in time for Alan’s wife (Julianna Margulies) to stop by and suspect an affair.
Yet the director, Jon Avnet, who wrote the script with Eric Nazarian, succeeds in keeping the movie watchable in spite of its contrivances. Whether it is the star power of the cast or the seductiveness of the period recreation, “Three Christs” has an appealing professionalism — an odd fit for a film about challenging a profession.