Seu Jorge and Rogê’s Bond Began in Brazil. It’s Since Moved to L.A.
Twenty-five years ago, the actor and singer Seu Jorge began a determined rise from the slums of Rio de Janeiro. The band he formed with a group of friends, Farofa Carioca, released an important album, “Moro no Brasil” (“I Live in Brazil”), a danceable yet probing portrait of life amid Rio’s crime, racism and poverty. Seu Jorge was the group’s obvious standout — he sang samba, reggae, funk and soul with swing, and rapped with theatrical expressiveness.
One of his biggest fans was Rogê, an aspiring samba-funk singer-songwriter from well-to-do Arpoador, a neighborhood that borders Ipanema. Having haunted Farofa Carioca’s shows, Rogê was stunned when Seu Jorge, who he’d never met, showed up at one of his gigs. “He stood right in front of the stage,” he recalled in a recent interview, “gave me his hand, and said, ‘Hi, Rogê, how are you?’”
For all their differences, the friendship still thrives. Now 49, Seu Jorge (born Jorge Mário da Silva; he has said his stage name means Your Jorge) is an international film and pop star — he’s best known to United States audiences for his onscreen work in the 2002 movie “City of God” as well as in Wes Anderson’s “The Life Aquatic With Steve Zissou,” for which he performed David Bowie songs in Portuguese. His hits are feel-good dance tunes, but he has the brooding presence and mournful, bloodshot eyes of a man who has seen too much. The 44-year-old Rogê (born Roger José Cury) is known almost exclusively in Lapa, Rio’s downtown night life hub. At Carioca da Gema, the club where he reigned for a decade, his high-octane samba singing and bright spirits kept crowds dancing for hours.
“He’s a special person to me,” Seu Jorge said in Portuguese last week. “He’s a composer I saw grow.”
Now his “older brother,” as Rogê calls Seu Jorge, is trying to push him to the next level. They are about to play three concerts in the United States; the first, on Thursday at the Town Hall in New York, is part of Winter Jazzfest. The show’s basis is “Seu Jorge & Rogê: Night Dreamer Direct-to-Disc Sessions,” a stark and moody new album due out Feb. 7 that recalls the glories — the nature, the food, the music, the folkloric gods — of a country that both men have now left behind. In 2013, Seu Jorge and his wife moved from São Paulo to Los Angeles; last year, Rogê followed, bringing his wife and their two boys.
Asked about the change, Seu Jorge explained that his daughters live nearby — “and wherever they are, it’s my home.” But Brazil holds troubling associations for him, including years of homelessness and the death of his brother from a policeman’s bullet. His disgust with the country’s corruption, high taxes and other woes exploded publicly in 2013, when he answered someone’s critical post on Twitter: “What opportunity did this [expletive] country give me, imbecile? I live in Los Angeles. And your BRAZIL didn’t help me with anything, you big fool!”
A firestorm resulted, with responders branding him arrogant and ungrateful. He insists his words were taken “out of context,” adding: “I was being provoked by haters and robots on the internet.”
Years later, the frustrations continue. Seu Jorge starred as the Brazilian guerrilla fighter Carlos Marighella in the 2019 film “Marighella”; its Brazilian release has faced a right-wing boycott that Seu Jorge declined to discuss. The absence of political or social consciousness-raising on the new album with Rogê is striking. “We don’t have any pretension of doing political things,” he said. “We only want to do music that reflects the sentiments of us together, living far from our own country.”
It was Seu Jorge who urged Rogê to move away from Brazil, which elected the far-right president Jair Bolsonaro in October 2018 and has been weathering spikes in violence and a slumping economy.
The current administration, Rogê said, “is against culture. They don’t like the samba.”
“It’s a shame,” he added, “because for me, samba is a religion. It’s the most precious thing we have. When I grew up, a lot of people said, ‘Why are you playing samba? You should play rock ’n’ roll!’”
His idols, he said, were all black, including Bob Marley, Stevie Wonder and the samba-funk pioneer Jorge Ben. In Lapa, doors swung open when he and a venerated samba star, Arlindo Cruz, began collaborating: “He was the guy who took me by the hand and said to everybody, this guy wrote songs with me.” From there, Rogê made six albums and a DVD, and helped write the theme song for the 2016 Olympics in Brazil. His weathered-beach-boy looks helped make him a downtown heartthrob.
But the big break never quite happened. In California, he started over as an unknown, playing weekly at the Townhouse, a club in Venice. Seu Jorge’s career remains strong, although it is still tied to Brazil; he spent some of last year back home filming the Netflix series “Irmandade” (“Brotherhood”), in which he plays an aboveboard lawyer with a crooked brother.
This year he plans to stick closer to music. Americans who come to hear him and Rogê probably won’t know Portuguese — “but we expect the audience to feel the songs, not to try to understand,” said Seu Jorge.
Like him, Rogê is loving California’s embrace. “I came to the United States very proud to be a Brazilian. I am playing Brazilian music. When I meet guys from hip-hop and other cultures, everybody respects that — sometimes much more than our own people.”