What to See Right Now in New York Art Galleries
In 1805, the Baroness Hyde de Neuville (1771-1849) chased Napoleon Bonaparte’s army across Europe in order to obtain a pardon for her husband, an aristocrat accused of conspiring to assassinate the arriviste French emperor. Her plea succeeded, the Neuvilles were banished to America, and so starts the story of “Artist in Exile: The Visual Diary of Baroness Hyde de Neuville” at the New-York Historical Society.
Born in Sancerre, France, Neuville was a self-taught artist, which means she learned primarily from books and illustrations, since women of her era weren’t allowed to draw from live models. She was a quick study though, and the swift arc of her proficiency is obvious in this exhibition of over 110 watercolors and drawings.
Neuville owned a portable watercolor paint box, a new contraption during that period, and she used it to document landscapes and people, flora and fauna, factories and mansions throughout the Eastern Seaboard and New York State. “Study of a Tree Trunk with Lichens and Fungi,” from 1807 to 1814, looks almost abstract and modern, while a “Corner of Greenwich Street” (1810) captures the spot where the World Trade Center would later stand.  And “Entrance Gate to the White House Garden with Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, D.C.” (1821) is the only known view of the White House at the time, with a stone wall, triumphal arch and formal gardens stretched out behind it.
Although Neuville traveled in privileged circles, she produced some of the most accurate and sympathetic portraits of marginalized Native Americans and mixed race and enslaved people from that period. (However, “Mary, a ‘Squaw’ of the Oneida Tribe,” from 1807, shown in a striped robe-blanket and leather leggings, uses a term probably derived from the Eastern Algonquian word for “woman” that is now considered derogatory.)
After returning to France in the 1820s, Neuville appears to have given up painting and drawing. It’s a shame, since her vision and craft were so lively and perspicuous. Perhaps, after traveling in seven countries and experiencing harrowing sea voyages, post-revolutionary France seemed a bit boring. MARTHA SCHWENDENER
This tribute to the illustrious gallerist Virginia Zabriskie, who died last year at 91, replicates and extends a survey of abstraction in photography that she mounted in New York in 1989. Thirty of the 47 artists who were in that show are included (six with the same images), complemented by more recent works.
The range of possibilities is staggering. Three of the American photography pioneers are here: Alfred Stieglitz, with one of his cloud studies (from 1929) that he termed “Equivalents,” finding in the sky the visual analogues to his emotional states; Alvin Langdon Coburn, whose “Eagle” (1917) was produced with a mirrored lens that fragmented the image like a kaleidoscope to form what he called a “vortograph”; and a 1917 photogravure by Paul Strand of banded shadows.
There are two pictures by Aaron Siskind, the Chicago artist whose photographs shared the gestural vibe of Abstract Expressionist painters, as well as an atypical one by Ralph Eugene Meatyard, a close-up of smeared paint drippings that evokes Willem de Kooning.
Contemporary artists bring the story up to date. Hiroshi Sugimoto’s “Lightning Fields 220” (2009) could be a crackling Barnett Newman zip. Mariah Robertson’s “175” (2014) splashes chemicals directly on color printing paper to create a cosmic garden.
A small gallery at the reinstalled Museum of Modern Art is devoted to photographic abstraction. But anyone seriously interested in the subject should make a point of seeing this far more ambitious, cannily selected and intelligently hung show. ARTHUR LUBOW
After the flags and the targets, after the head-scratching canvases affixed with rulers or silverware, Jasper Johns took a drive out to the Hamptons in 1972 and saw, in the opposite lane of the Long Island Expressway, some kind of crosshatch pattern on a speeding car. Mr. Johns likes a good myth — but whatever inspired him, America’s most pokerfaced painter embraced something like total abstraction in the 1970s, via mirrored or syncopated fields of back-and-forth lines that, on occasion, obfuscated underlying images or designs.
Eleven of these crosshatched paintings and works on paper, many lent from Mr. Johns’s personal collection and all delighting in irony and misidentification, are on view now at Craig F. Starr. (The show celebrates the gallery’s 15th anniversary; its unexpected curator is none other than Agnes Gund, the extraordinary philanthropist who donated Mr. Johns’s crosshatched “Between the Clock and the Bed” to MoMA.)
Whether in the red, yellow and blue slashes of “Untitled” (1979) or the more densely chromatic “Cicada” (1979), Mr. Johns used crosshatching to reconcile the theatrics of Abstract Expressionism with the matter-of-factness of his own early work. Each one attempts to give form to the paradox of expression through nondisclosure; even a drawing here of “Dancers on a Plane” (1982), which supplements the crosshatches with a little symmetrical scrotum, gives away almost nothing about sex or self. Three small works from the “Between the Clock and Bed” series, inspired by Edvard Munch, prefigure Mr. Johns’s anxious figuration of the 1980s. Yet this show confirms that death and anomie were already haunting the crosshatches as early as 1974, when he christened his tightly packed, carefully mirrored chevrons with a title that could apply to so many of his unquiet abstractions: “Corpse and Mirror.” JASON FARAGO
What does radiation look like? How can we envision something we can’t see? These questions are at the core of “Projeto Chernobyl” (2006-10), a series of radiographs produced by the Brazilian artist Alice Miceli.
To make the images, Ms. Miceli developed her own methods for capturing radiation on film (a process most often used for X-rays). She then traveled to Ukraine, where she placed radiographic film around the Chernobyl exclusion zone, an area set aside after the nuclear power plant disaster in 1986 that remains largely abandoned. The film stayed put for anywhere from two to eight months. Some of the negatives were ruined by the elements or couldn’t be found again, but Ms. Miceli recovered 30.
They’re on display at Americas Society, illuminated by light boxes in a dramatically darkened gallery. Outlines of trees or grass are sometimes recognizable, but mostly the images contain swirls and blurs and ghostly voids of gray. Some have white patches so bright, they seem poised to burn through: traces of “hot spots” of nuclear contamination, according to the artist.
For the viewer, there’s a gap between the abstract radiographs and what one knows they’re meant to show. It’s a haunting and fitting disjunction for trying to comprehend such severe, man-made devastation. We may not be able to fully picture it, but we know that it is real. JILLIAN STEINHAUER