Shooting in Germany Leaves 6 Dead
BERLIN — A man shot and killed his parents and four other members of his family then telephoned the police to turn himself in, the authorities said Friday, after the multiple killings at an inn that traumatized a small town in southwestern Germany.
The police said they had no motive for why the 26-year-old German citizen had turned his 9 mm handgun on his family at the inn in the town of Rat am See in Baden-Württemberg, where the shooter and at least some of victims were believed to have lived.  
The victims included three women aged, 36, 56 and 62 and three men, aged 36, 65 and 69. Their names were not immediately released, in keeping with German privacy laws.
“We are currently working on the assumption of a domestic dispute, since all of the victims seem to be related,” said Reiner Möller, the head of the police force in nearby Aalen, at a hastily called news conference hours after the shooting.
The shooter, whose identity also was not released, had a license for the handgun used in the killings, which he had acquired for target practice, Mr. Möller said.
Shooting deaths are relatively rare in Germany, but have increased in recent years amid a climate of fear about personal security. Some of that fear has been fanned by populist forces after the arrival of more than 1 million people seeking asylum in 2015.
The police dispatched around 100 local and state officers to the scene, after a call came in from a person who identified himself as the shooter at 12:48, Mr. Möller said. He remained on the phone to give more details and was quickly apprehended when the first police units arrived at the scene He remains in custody.
Responding officers found two of the dead inside of a building that housed the inn, along with the handgun, Mr. Möller said, and the others were found just outside of the building.
It was not immediately clear whether the family owned or managed the inn, just that at least some of the victims and the gunmen lived in the building, he said.
Two other people were wounded in the shooting, according to the police, and two boys, aged 12 and 14, were threatened by gunman, but were not injured.
Rot am See has a population of about 5,000 and is about midway between Nuremberg and Stuttgart.
In Germany, gun licenses can normally be obtained to hunt, for target practice, or in rare cases, self-protection. Background checks are required.
Last October, a man attacked a synagogue in the eastern city of Halle using homemade weapons. He shot and killed two bystanders.
This year, three people — parents and their 21-year-old son — were killed in a house in Bavaria by a man who was training to become a gunsmith. The police found a stash of weapons at the house of the man, who had also filmed the killings.
