How the Lady Became Less Gray
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
If you were to pick up a copy of The New York Times in 1960, you would have mostly seen dense pillars of words. Sentences would have been packed tightly, like commuters on a busy subway car.
The Times was, as its nickname suggests, the Gray Lady.
But over the next two decades, that began to change. A bold art director, Louis Silverstein, emphasized graphic design elements that have since become standard industry practice. More white space appeared and the photos got bigger.
Working during a period of cultural, technological and economic shifts, he transformed The Times into a paper that took design as seriously as it did text in its journalism, and he helped to establish the role of the art director as a key player in the newsroom. By 1984, the paper was respected for its design by industry experts.
“It was trying to change from the ‘old gray lady’ to a more vibrant newspaper,” said Steven Heller, a former art director for The Times who teaches design at the School of Visual Arts.
In 1967, Mr. Silverstein — then the corporate art director — changed the body typeface of the paper from Ideal to Imperial and increased the size of the text. As the art director of the newsroom in 1976, he implemented a more dramatic shift by decreasing the number of columns across the paper from eight to six, which made it easier to read.
“From a design angle, the main consideration was making the paper more accessible,” Mr. Heller said.
Behind the scenes, The Times faced a significant corporate restructuring that would give the newsroom legs to experiment. In 1969, The New York Times Company went public, and a few years later the company broadened profits by purchasing television stations, magazines and other newspapers. Under A.M. Rosenthal, the executive editor, the art department became part of the newsroom for the first time, with Mr. Silverstein leading it. The company began to explore new types of journalism to reach readers in this age of expansion.
“We were competing with television,” Mr. Heller said. “There was the beginning of the short attention span, which people complain about today.”
The paper later introduced new sections, including SportsMonday, ScienceTimes on Tuesday and the Weekend Arts section, that were heavily influenced by lifestyle magazines.
“There were people that felt that The Times had to change with the times,” Mr. Heller said. “There were other people that felt that the changes being made editorially were hurting the reputation of the paper.”
In 1978, The Times also switched from hot type to cold type: the most significant change in newspaper production in a century. In the days of hot type, teams of technicians operated linotype machines and hand-placed the text line by line. The new system used lasers to transfer the text onto photosensitive paper in a process called photocomposition, which gave the designers more control over the type.
“Cold type allowed us to play a little more,” Mr. Heller said.
Infographics, which used visual elements to explain complex topics, also became a regular feature in the newspaper. Mr. Silverstein called these “sides of beef,” named for the diagram of a cow often posted in butcher shops that identifies different cuts of meat. In 1981, the coverage of the spaceship Columbia’s maiden flight featured a combination of graphs, diagrams, timelines and flight paths, while previously that story might have been told only in words.
“The reader could have both a visual and reading experience,” Mr. Heller said. “It would have been possible with hot type, but it wouldn’t have been as easy and fluid.”
Many of these innovations opened the door for a more integrated approach to text and visuals, and both are now seen as key to understanding the news.
“We’re using elements from the Lou Silverstein era and applying them to 2019,” said Fred Bierman, director of news design for the News Print Hub. “And we try to keep it looking like The New York Times.”