How to Break Up with Your Therapist
“Please don’t ghost your therapist,” says Catherine F. Eubanks, a clinical psychologist and associate professor at Yeshiva University in New York, whose research focuses on the bond between therapists and patients. If you feel unsafe, or your therapist has done something unethical or inappropriate, quit therapy in whatever way you want. If you and your therapist have mutual respect and trust, but you feel ready to be done, for whatever reason, tell the person. “This could be an amazing opportunity for you to work through an interpersonal strain or conflict as it’s happening,” Eubanks says. Studies show that patients who repaired a breakdown of the therapeutic relationship with their therapist had better psychotherapy outcomes than those who never experienced a breakdown at all.
It could be that you are ready to move on — maybe your therapist isn’t a good fit; maybe you’re ready to graduate. Whatever the reason, examine your desire to quit carefully. Look for behavior patterns. “Ask yourself, ‘Is there something familiar about this?’ ” Eubanks says. Do you tend to walk out on people? Or maybe you’re inclined to stay in dysfunctional situations? If you want to stop treatment, bring it up at the beginning of an appointment, not the end. Allow a session or two to discuss. Speak using “I” statements — “I’m feeling dissatisfied” — and provide details. Note the way your therapist reacts. “Hopefully they will be open, curious and compassionate, not defensive,” Eubanks says.
Often the duration of therapeutic treatment isn’t clearly defined. Some people are in twice-weekly psychoanalysis for 30 years, and others might do just 10 sessions of cognitive-behavioral therapy to treat anxiety. Therapists may be reluctant to tell patients when they should stop. “The last thing I want to do is suggest that I’m tired of a patient,” Eubanks says. The end of treatment doesn’t have to be abrupt; there are ways to spread out the termination process, including scheduling periodic “booster sessions.”
Eubanks has had patients disappear. “All therapists have,” she says. When that happens, she calls, writes a letter, keeps a spot open in her schedule for a few weeks in case her patient turns up again. Remember, the way you communicate and behave with people at the end of a relationship will inform future relationships — yours and theirs. Try to be honest and empathetic. “It’s hard,” Eubanks says, “to break up with anybody.”