Money, Rage and Love
Happy New Year! On this first day of 2020, I’m reflecting on the parenting stories that moved me from the past year. What I love about covering this beat is that how we raise children touches on every topic imaginable: Money, privilege, politics, race, business and technology are all represented in my best-of list, in no particular order. Parenting also involves a range of emotions — the experience can bring you to places you didn’t know existed in yourself. I included that here as well, from the tragic to the ridiculous to the sublime.
Here’s to a wonderful next year, and next decade. May you revel in the joy and get through the heartbreak and laugh at a lot of poop jokes poorly enunciated by toddlers.
— Jessica Grose, lead editor, NYT Parenting
“Excuse Me, May I Raise Your Child?” by Farai Chideya in Zora. This is the gorgeous, heartbreaking story of Chideya’s journey through three failed adoptions. It’s the parenting story I have thought most about this year, and it is just as lovely on my fourth reading as it was on my first.
“The Rage Mothers Don’t Talk About” by Minna Dubin in NYT Parenting and “Love and Anger” by Keith Gessen in The New Yorker. Read these two as beautifully written companion pieces; your children can push you to the brink, and Dubin and Gessen illustrate how learning to deal with it is a long and sometimes harrowing process.
“How Parents Are Robbing Their Children of Adulthood” by Claire Cain Miller and Jonah Engel Bromwich in The New York Times and “‘Intensive’ Parenting Is Now the Norm in America” by Joe Pinsker in The Atlantic. How did we get to the “Varsity Blues” college admissions scandal, where actors and C.E.O.s were paying hundreds of thousands of dollars to get their kids into the school of their choice? These two pieces about the extreme parenting styles of wealthy Americans begin to explain it. (Honorary mention goes to “The Battle of Grace Church” by Jessica Pressler in New York Magazine, because it’s the proto-Varsity Blues scandal about a battle royale at a fancy Brooklyn preschool.)
“The Youngest Child Separated From His Family at the Border Was 4 Months Old” by Caitlin Dickerson in The New York Times. Perhaps the biggest story of the year in parenting is the Trump administration’s family separation policy. Dickerson, a Times reporter, has done incredible work revealing the human cost of this policy, and this story about Constantin Mutu, who was separated from his parents as an infant, is stark, painful and necessary.
A collection of columns on technology by Christina Caron in NYT Parenting and “Momo Is as Real as We’ve Made Her” by John Herrman in The New York Times. Much of the technology we use with our kids is incredibly new, and that can make it alarming. Our own Christina Caron and The Times’s John Herrman are both soothing voices explaining the tech in our lives in an evidence-based, rational way.
“As a Black Mother, My Parenting Is Always Political” by Dani McClain in The Nation. McClain, who is also the author of the book “We Live for the We,” weaves in her personal narrative with history and sociology about black motherhood in a powerful reported essay.
“The Coast of Utopia” by Carina Chocano in Vanity Fair, “The Mommy Blog Is Dead. Long Live the Mommy Blog” by Lyz Lenz in Topic and “Did Moms Exist Before Social Media?” by Kathryn Jezer-Morton in NYT Parenting. What can I say, I am a sucker for stories about #momfluencers.
“Why Are Kids So Obsessed With Poop Jokes?” by Jenny Marder in NYT Parenting. I’m just proud that we published a piece in the paper of record that included the phrase “Butt Talk Time.”
P.S. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates. Read last week’s newsletter about the decade in parenting, and why almost all American parents feel judged.
If you want a chance to get your Tiny Victory published, find us on Instagram @NYTparenting and use the hashtag #tinyvictories; email us; or enter your Tiny Victory at the bottom of this page. Include your full name and location. Tiny Victories may be edited for clarity and style. Your name, location and comments may be published, but your contact information will not. By submitting to us, you agree that you have read, understand and accept the Reader Submission Terms in relation to all of the content and other information you send to us.