Writers Guild Nominations: ‘Parasite,’ ‘Marriage Story,’ ‘Joker’ and More
Eight of the last 10 best-picture winners also nabbed a screenplay Oscar along the way, so Monday’s Writers Guild of America nominations may shed a little more light on an unusually wide-open Oscar race.
Among the guild’s original-screenplay nominees are three movies that won Golden Globes on Sunday. They are the war film “1917,” which took the Globe for best drama; the South Korean sensation “Parasite,” the Globes’ foreign-language film winner; and the divorce dramedy “Marriage Story,” which netted Laura Dern a supporting-actress Globe. The WGA Award category was filled out by the mystery “Knives Out” and the acclaimed teen comedy “Booksmart."
In the adapted-screenplay race, the guild singled out some of this awards season’s heaviest hitters, like “The Irishman” and “Joker,” as well as “Jojo Rabbit,” “Little Women” and the Mister Rogers drama “A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood.”
But where is Quentin Tarantino, who has won two screenwriting Oscars and took the Globes’ screenplay prize for “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”? Since he has refused to join the Writers Guild, the group has ruled him ineligible for nominations. Eligibility requirements also excluded films like “The Farewell” and “Pain and Glory,” both of which should remain in the Oscar race.
The WGA Awards will be held Feb. 1, with simultaneous ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Here is the full list of nominations.
“1917,” written by Sam Mendes & Krysty Wilson-Cairns
“Booksmart,” Emily Halpern & Sarah Haskins, and Susanna Fogel and Katie Silberman
“Knives Out,” Rian Johnson
“Marriage Story,” Noah Baumbach
“Parasite,” Bong Joon Ho and Han Jin Won
“A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood,” screenplay by Micah Fitzerman-Blue & Noah Harpster, inspired by the article “Can You Say… Hero?” by Tom Junod
“The Irishman,” Steven Zaillian, based on the book “I Heard You Paint Houses” by Charles Brandt
“Jojo Rabbit,” Taika Waititi, based on the book “Caging Skies” by Christine Leunens
“Joker,” Todd Phillips & Scott Silver, based on DC Comics characters
“Little Women,” Greta Gerwig, based on the Louisa May Alcott novel
“Citizen K,” written by Alex Gibney
“Foster,” Mark Jonathan Harris
“The Inventor: Out for Blood in Silicon Valley,” Alex Gibney
“Joseph Pulitzer: Voice of the People," Robert Seidman & Oren Rudavsky
“The Kingmaker,” Lauren Greenfield