After Losing My Sight, Struggling to Be Seen
At the kickoff dinner for a five-week retreat in the Catskills, I said to my fellow writers, “I suck at being blind.”
This is only partly true. I’m good with the technology that allows me to be a writer, but I’m not so good at the mobility thing, which is where my sighted partner, Alabaster, comes in. I had work to do and didn’t want to waste time getting lost on the way to the dining hall, so I asked if I could bring him. They said yes.
I was the only blind person, the only disabled person, the only person to bring a companion, so it was understandable that people would ask, “How did you two meet?” But it bothered me that my fellow writers were more interested in my relationship than my work. As he and I told and retold our complicated history, we were pushed to the breaking point.
Before the age of 10, I had normal vision, and since my early 40s, I have been totally blind. During the decades of losing my sight, I was visually impaired.
As I was going blind, my dating life proceeded as it does for many urban 20- and 30-year-olds, with a lot of falling in love that sometimes resulted in shacking up. Two months here, four years there — that seemed to be my relationship expiration date.
[Sign up for Love Letter, our weekly email about Modern Love, weddings and relationships.]
The year I turned 30, I trained with my first guide dog, Millennium, a sleek black Lab. I still had some usable vision during the day but could hardly see at night. With Millennium, though, I could go out by myself at night for the first time in years.
My boyfriend became a casualty of my newfound freedom. When he moved out, he said (half joking) to Millennium: “You won, buddy.”
Yet that freedom did not translate into how people saw me: I suddenly went from looking “normal” to looking blind. At intersections, strangers would grab my arm and attempt to usher Millennium and me across the street. I understand they were trying to help, but sighted people often forget that blind people also do not like to be grabbed by strangers.
“I know karate!” I’d say, shrugging them off, and I did. Blind karate is a thing.
This was in New York City, where I was teaching English literature as part of my graduate degree. I wore cute little outfits — herringbone skirt suits with high-heel boots. I did quite a bit of dating those first few years with Millennium.
But academia was not for me. After receiving a dissertation grant, I had so much time on my hands that I began moonlighting as a performer at East Village open mics. I wasn’t particularly talented at comedy or the accordion, but I got friendly with great people who accepted my guide dog and me as two of the freaks.
I met my partner, Alabaster, in a basement black-box theater. He’s a singer and composer, and from his first song, I experienced a strange mix of sorrow and glee and awe. I could tell from the way people treated him that he was good-looking, too. In various stages of proximity and strong lighting, I would glimpse that fact. Thus, he is preserved in my mind’s eye, youngish and beautiful forever, as am I.
We were both loosely dating other inappropriate people in the scene. Nothing happened until my roommate and I invited him to take the vacated third room in our Astoria apartment. Our previous relationships melted away, and when he got a gig to transport some rich man’s art to Florida, I volunteered to join him. We first kissed by the side of a fancy swimming pool, and love followed hard. That was a decade ago.
Something the movies don’t show when it comes to blindness is how it can make a person paranoid in the love department. Or at least that has been my experience: Is he looking at some other woman? Is she prettier than me? Is he looking at me with love? Such are the questions that fueled my jealousy. I had been prone to fits of insecurity with other boyfriends, but my anger grew with my blindness.
During one of our early meals with my writing fellows, Alabaster said, “Oh yeah, we had some knockdown drag-out fights back then. She punched me in the face once.”
Everyone laughed. I was aghast. Besides the fact that I don’t remember punching him in the face, it’s not something I wanted these near strangers to know about me. He meant it to be a funny story about how messed up we were back then. And we were. We broke up after a year together.
The summer of our breakup marked my ninth anniversary with my first guide dog. I had lost quite a bit of vision over those years and it was harder for me to get around. Yet, it was time to retire Millennium. He was slowing and needed to live his final years in tranquillity. My guide dog, my lover and my roommate all moved out in quick succession.
I called my best friend, Indigo, crying. She flew in the next day to help me. We cleaned up the apartment and I found new roommates. I also had a summer fling with a nice young man I met at a show.
“Is he cute?” I asked Indigo.
“Oh, yeah,” she said. “You just want to shoot him up in a rocket.”
Which is how he came to be called The Astronaut. But it didn’t last.
I got trained with my second guide dog, Igor, a beautiful German shepherd, but I had never developed good mobility skills. Before, I could always see traffic flow and now that I was blind, I didn’t know how to listen. Guide dogs are only as good as their partners, and I was not good.
Alabaster and I never completely stopped seeing each other, although we dated other people. A few years later, we re-declared our love and commitment, and within a month, Igor died suddenly because of complications during surgery. I was devastated and riddled with guilt for my ineptitude having filled his too-short life with so much stress.
Alabaster helped me through this loss, and we clung to each other. We were more humble by then and somewhat more sober.
Six years have passed during which we have been nearly inseparable. It’s impossible to say what our relationship would be like if I were not blind. Being blind is part of who I am now, and being with him is also part of who I am. Yet I struggle to be seen as a capable, distinct individual, which is why, after working so hard on my book proposal and selling the project, after being nominated by my agent to attend the Catskills fellowship — completing the beastly application, and then being accepted — it was painful to think that my writing fellows were not seeing me.
The paranoia crept back, except now, instead of fearing my guy would be led away by another woman, I feared my own accomplishments were being eclipsed by his considerable charms and talents.
Alabaster helped me get around campus, and others assumed he did much more. At dinner, I mentioned reading an email, and someone said, “You mean, Alabaster reads it to you?”
I explained about my screen-reading software, my Braille display.
Even after I presented my work, people were more enthusiastic about Alabaster’s music and former military service. Maybe they thought blindness made me less approachable. Maybe they wondered what a great, sighted guy like Alabaster was doing with this blind-woman ball-and-chain.
I wish I could say that I was proud rather than jealous of the attention he got, but the imbalance strained our relationship in a way that it hadn’t been in years. So many nights in the Catskills ended in arguments and tears.
I began to dream of reasserting my independence, of returning to my life as a single person of worth rather than a blind sidekick. Although imagining my life without Alabaster made me see that I could of course live without him, I also understood, with a sudden clarity, that I did not want to.
“These people do not appreciate me,” I thought, “but he does.”
On the last night of camaraderie over beers, someone said, “You and Alabaster have been one of the most popular topics of conversation here!” And for the first time, I didn’t hear, “What’s a great guy like that doing with a blind woman?” I heard, “You two make a really good couple.”
Only a few of my fellow writers had significant others waiting for them at home. Among us were more divorcées and single people. Looking back, I am astounded that I forgot for those weeks in the Catskills that, blind or not, love is easy to lose, hard to find.