What Students Are Saying About How Much They Use Their Phones, and Whether We Should Be Worried
Please note: This post is part of The Learning Network’s ongoing Current Events Conversation feature. We invite students to react to the news via our daily writing prompts and, each week, we publish a selection of their comments.
We frequently ask students about their relationship with screens, but a question we posed this week seems to have struck a chord with the teenagers who comment on our writing prompts.
Inspired by the article “Panicking About Your Kids’ Phones? New Research Says Don’t,” we asked students: Should the adults in your life be worried by how much you use your phone?
We heard from over 300 teenagers who gave a flurry of nuanced, thoughtful and enlightening responses. In fact, their comments were so good that we decided to feature only this prompt in this week’s Current Events Conversation, instead of the usual three, so we can highlight as many responses as possible.
Some students admitted to spending upward of eight hours a day online, with the majority averaging around two to four hours. Some said their devices were a reasonable escape from the pressures of teenage life, while others explained they were essential for school. And still others raised an insightful question: Why is their “phone addiction” perceived as more harmful than that of the adults in their lives?
As you’ll see below, one thing was crystal clear in their reflections: These teenagers spend a lot of time thinking about their phone usage. And they have a critical lens not only on how much they use their phones, but also on how it affects their education, emotional life and relationships.
Read on for a fuller scope of the comments, but before you do, we want to offer a warm welcome to new classes from Ames High School, Iowa; Carney; Florida; Fort Mill High School; Georgia; Hightstown High School, N.J.; Nelson County High School; New Berlin, Wis.; New York; and Pennsylvania.
Please note: Student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear exactly as they were originally submitted.
I think that I spend a little too much time on my phone per day. And by a little, I mean a lot. I’m not sure my average but I know I could be going to bed a lot earlier and get my work done quicker if I just put it down. I do many things on my phone like text people, snapchat, play games, and so on.
I think it does have a positive benefit on my well being because without it, I would not have friendships and relationships I have today. The negative effects it has on me is time usage and keeping me from doing work and going to bed on time. I am worried about being on my phone too much but I don’t think it interferes with me being social, especially in this day and age.
— Ryan, GA
My average screen time is probably about 12 hours a day. I worry a lot about how much time I spend on my phone. But the way I socialize is through my phone. I use social media to communicate, and I have to use my phone to make calls and text. But whenever I have to study, I pull out my phone and go on it for about an hour …
When it is time to go to sleep, I go on my phone in the dark with dark mode on. My bed has my charger connected to it so I can easily stay up all night. I want to remove it but because I am so addicted to my phone, I do not. One time I fell asleep at 2 am because I was on my phone, and it made me extremely tired (this was on a school night).
— Jessica Chen, J.R. Masterman, Philadelphia, PA
Since I got an iPhone, I have spent more time on my phone because of social media apps. I caught myself on multiple occasions telling myself “only 15 more minutes and then I’ll start my homework,” but then I end up spending 30 minutes on my phone. When I have tried to use my phone less I end up watching tv, so I just go from one type of a screen to the next.
— Allison Ciero, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn, IL
I spend too much time on my phone. I sometimes think about how much I am on my phone and I’m disgusted with how much time I feel like I’m wasting. But the truth is, I do a lot more than scroll through social media or watch stupid videos on my phone. My phone is a portable library that carries all of my favorite books on it. And those stupid videos and posts sometimes completely change my day for the better.
— Mason Evans, Hoggard High School Wilmington, NC
On average, I spend about 6 hours a day on my phone. It is spent with me going on social media, playing games, or watching Netflix. Every weekend, a notification pops up showing me how much time I have spent and each week it has gone up. I am starting to become a lot more cautious about how much time I spend on my phone because it is starting to worry me. My phone has become something that I always have to have and it never leaves my side. It has gotten in the way of me studying and spending time with my family which has started to worry me. I believe that parents should know how much time their kid is using their phone but I don’t think that they should act upon it.
— Mark, Hightstown
I understand a little micromanaging when it comes to technology time. However, by the time we reach high school, we should all be responsible for ourselves in that realm, to turn in homework, to know our time limits. It is time for the parents to release their grasp unless it is absolutely necessary.
It is our job as teenagers to learn what happens when we stay on our phones too long and we don’t get enough sleep or don’t finish a homework assignment, we won’t understand the consequences if we don’t learn for ourselves.
— Josh Reifel, Glenbard West, Glen Ellyn, IL
While I stand by this statement, I would also like to point out that our parents didn’t grow up with this stuff, and they may not know how to handle our usage in the best way. Often times I find my parents using the phone — that they bought for us — as punishment. They threaten to take it away or to throw it out, this only makes out subconscious want it more. Moreover, they make us feel guilty for being born in a world where we do have access to these devices — as if we could help it. They say “when I was a kid we didn’t have to talk to our friends all the time, we would wait to see them the next day at school.” They try us guilt you into not using which once again, will only make us want it more to spite them.
— kenna royce, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn, Il
While some parents see it beneficial to limit teens usage on phones, others don’t take any action. For example, my parents have always trusted me to be responsible in my time management, and balancing school, Church, and friends. However, I do understand that my parents pay for my phone, and data usage, and I would willingly comply if they had any restrictions or rules. Phones, however, often rely as a crutch for parents, meaning they often incorrectly blame their child’s issue, or challenges for how much time they spend on their phone.
— Anna Atwood, Bryant High School Arkansas
In observing my friends and classmates, I think that most of us have a handle on what an appropriate amount of screen time is. Social media can be a breeding ground for bullying, which can then lead to depression and anxiety, but I’m not entirely sure that would correlate with simply spending more time on devices. Hopefully, if parents instill the value of limitations while kids are young, they will be able to control themselves appropriately in the future.
— Sarah Song, Ames High School
I feel like I’m extremely in touch with my personal media usage, but it isn’t easy. Apps are designed to keep you on them as long as possible, and sometimes it’s horribly hard to put down a phone after seeing a Snapchat from your friend pop up. After checking just now, I spent an average of 1 hour 58 minutes on my phone last month. Just shy of 2 hours, which is the recommendation maximum time adolescents should spend on non-education related screens. Many of my peers use them 6+ hours daily.
I notice an exact correlation between the amount of time I’m on my phone and how productive I am that given day. If I get out of bed and don’t immediately pick up my phone, I feel like I can get ready faster, and feel more energized and motivated.
Sometimes, if I have a lot of homework one night, I plug my phone in in a separate room, so I won’t think about it. It’s just so easy to forget about the essay you need to write if you unlock your phone and start messing around. They’re excellent distractions.
I couldn’t agree more with the statement that “phones increase anxiety, depression and sleep deprivation among teenagers.” I’ve seen it happen in myself and my peers. In the 3 years I’ve had a phone, there have been too many nights I regret sacrificing sleep for texting to a friend online or getting lost on YouTube. It’s becoming more important to be aware of how our phones affect our lives as they take over more and more aspects of our days.
— Mollie Brinker, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I think that in some ways it could be good for adults to monitor how much children are on their phones today. However, who is going to monitor the adults? What I have noticed while growing up in this world of technology, is that so many adults around me are on their phone just as often as the children. I think it can be difficult to stay away from our phones when everyone around you is on their phones. I think we have to accept technology’s role and try to be as responsible with it as we can.
— Kaylee Phillips, Glenbard West HS, Glen Ellyn, IL
Some evenings at my house consists of our family in the same room, each of us on our same devices. Adults should worry about cell phone usage, in both their life and their children’s lives.
A part of the issue is that parents can use their devices just as much as the kids. Adults must realize that they too must change. If they take their kid’s phone away, they should put theirs away too. They should push their child to have real-life experiences, where words can’t be misinterpreted.
— Evan Lippolis, Ames High School
I feel like phones have a negative effect on the mental stability of most teenagers today. There are so many things we worry about now … “How many snaps have I got this hour?”, “Has he seen my story yet?”, “I wonder if he’s just ignoring me?”
Our phones present us with an ultimatum, Go out and be social, or stay in and get on facetime. It’s not the same, there are certain endorphins your mind releases when you are physically in contact with another person. Human interaction is healthy.
My phone brings me mixed emotions, and I kind of rely on my phone for almost everything. Before I had a phone my life was so easy and I was a social butterfly, now I’m a 17 year old girl who comes home from work and watches a movie on my phone until my eyes physically will not open.
— Brooklyn Harcrow, Lubbock, TX
I usually spend about 3 hours a week on my phone. I grew up in Haiti, so most of the time I am in contact with my friends back home. When we lived in Haiti, FaceTime was a way that I could not only talk to my sister, who was at Iowa State, but we could also see her.
My phone has had negative impacts on my health. I have had chronic migraines that have been affected by my posture, which is aggravated by being hunched over my phone all day. I also find myself in more pain after even a short time on my phone. Social media has also left me feeling left out and more discouraged about my own life. As someone who is in a new atmosphere and environment, when I see on social media my friends’ activities I feel more isolated and alone.
— Kerlande Mompremier, Ames High School
I most definitely see the connection between higher levels of stress and being on your phone for a more than needed amount of time. Scrolling through social media and looking at small square sized snapshots of a person’s “picture perfect life” can really have an effect on both self-esteem and mental health. The world and especially the younger generations must learn to spark creativity and imagination. Those things can only be formed through one’s mind, experiences, and thoughts, not any phone or device on the planet can provide them.
— Sadie Dunne, Hoggard High school in Wilmington, NC
For me personally, I tend to find myself veering away from my phone during stressful times because I feel like all it does is add to it. I have anxiety and have seen that the negative effects from social media only add to that anxiousness. I agree that phone usage and constant usage of social media can definitely increase anxiety and depression, if you allow yourself to get involved so much you can’t return to a normal lifestyle without it. I think that as I feel like I’m starting to feel more anxious and stressed, my phone does not help the situation but makes it worse, so I try to stay away from it during these times.
— Taylor Tomlinson, Lubbock, TX
Speaking personally, I can recall many times in which social media has helped me feel less lonely than I otherwise would have been. I have severe anxiety, so the idea of socializing with people in a less formal setting, such as in a lunchroom, or outside of class is terrifying to me. So, as a result, I am often alone during these periods. I’ll go off and find my own corner, and I sit and have to watch as those around me have fun with their friends and socialize.
I have gone through this process near-daily for ten years, and I am confident that without social media to fall back on, I would have been driven mad. Social media makes me feel as though there are people out there I can talk to, and that I can control the conversation however I like. I can have friends that I respond to at my own pace, leaving me room to better formulate my responses.
— Jackson Bumgarner, Bryant High School, AR
My mom is a really busy woman and she’s not always there for me and my phone has been my shelter since 5th grade. When I came home feeling sad in school, a couple of youtube videos can cheer me up. Smartphones also make contacting friends and families easier making me less lonely during my sad times. The use of phone also opens a new window of opportunities, I learnt how to edit and shoot videos from youtube. There was a time when my mental health was just not great and the internet saved me.
— shirley, fhs
My first friend was an online friend. I was in fifth grade and I was obsessed with Hamilton, and would spend hours reading about and listening to the songs. My family was on vacation in WildWood, and we were living in a small hotel. I was swimming in the pool and a kid came up to me, and I found out we both liked Hamilton a lot, so we started talking. At the end of the vacation the kid told me her email and we started texting on hangouts. We still text to this day. My phone played a big part in letting me stay in touch, and it built my relationship with her.
— Arianna Andriyevsky, Julia R. Masterman
As the life of a teenager continues to increase in its complexity and demands, the resources and tools a smartphone can provide help keep teenagers grounded. So, before adults chastise us for our use of phones (while they’re leveling up in Candy Crush) it’s important to show that phones are very powerful tools, sometimes too powerful.
With how many activities a teenager can be involved in these days, smartphones help make more productive use of their time, keeping up with meetings, get-togethers, and updates. Whether it be communicating with other club members, or simply catching up with friends, these communication tools help bring people closer without necessitating time-consuming travel.
— Sayre S., Ames High School
I am on my phone about three hours a day. The majority of this is spent on social media apps like snapchat or twitter and listening to music. My phone has a positive influence on me. I feel more connected to the world and what is going on and while that is not always a good thing it is nice to be informed and updated on events within seconds.
— Mehdi Sebghati, Ames High School
My average screen time is about 40 minutes per week. I typically look at news, talk with my relatives in China through WeChat, or go on Youtube to watch cooking videos … My phone does help me build my Chinese skills when texting in WeChat. On WeChat, I can also build relationships with my relatives and friends that I cannot meet face-to-face.
However, my parents are still very worried about my time on my phone. That’s because I have glasses, and my eyesight has been worsening every year. They express their concern by speaking my name in a warning tone when they think I’ve been on my phone long enough. I listen to them, because I know that they are trying to do the best for them.
— Daniella Liang, J.R. Masterman
I think adults should be worried about how much their child is on their phone. If my child was constantly on their phone I would be mad because it is disrespectful when you are with someone and they won’t get off their phone. I get offended and annoyed when my friends are on their phones instead of talking to me and I wouldn’t want to be that rude to someone so if my parents told me I shouldn’t be on my phone I think that’s a good thing. Parents are supposed to teach their children how to talk, walk, and ride a bike, they should teach them proper manners and to not go be on your phone for too long.
— Anna Diab, Glenbard West HS, Glen Ellyn, IL
The answer to this question is different for me than many of my peers because unlike many “savvy” teens I have a flip phone. When I was fifteen I decided to stick with a flip phone, it solved my basic needs. I’m currently seventeen and have friends. It came down to me seeing kids and people on their phones at dangerous and inappropriate times. They were on their while driving, in school, and at the supper table. When I see somebody on their phone it reminds me that there is more to life. I am on my phone for less than ten minutes a day, still, I have survived. I can call and text people without the hassle of getting social media notifications. I’m not saying smartphones are bad they can be very useful. I just prefer reality.
— Ethan Morton, Ames, Iowa
I hate that I’m one of those teenagers who have a mini heart attack when they don’t feel their phone in their pocket. I know I’m not on my phone nearly as much as some of my peers, but even the time I do spend there I resent. Despite what the article says about technology not having any real negative influence on mental health, I can’t help but feel like it causes other problems.
We text and DM people when we have something to say, leaving behind outdated voice-calling and — gasp — that archaic practice of talking in person. So much of communication is nonverbal. Many today struggle to maintain eye contact, pay full undivided attention to others, and meaningfully interact in person. Screens are our modern-day masks and boy, do we love hiding behind them. While maybe it is true that technology doesn’t directly connect to the rise in mental disease and anxiety, it leads to a host of other problems, most prominent among these being social decay.
— Grace Robertson, Hoggard High School Wilmington, NC
Basically I have always had really bad anxiety way before I got a phone. Once I got to middle school and I started to mature it got worse because I was finally able to see all the bad in the world that my parents had protected me from. Which I believe is one of the leading factors of my depression. But once I got a phone I was so happy because I was always able to communicate with my friends no matter where I was. Then when I was given social media I really felt connected because I was able to get updates on what everyone was doing and what was going on in the world, but then when my parents found out about my depression they complete ignored the fact that they had sheltered me my entire life and blamed it all on my phone so now I do not have social media and I still feel the same way but I feel less connected and more isolated.
I guess what I’m trying to say is that I don’t think that phones have ruined a generation I think it’s the parents, they don’t realize that sheltering us is hurting us …
— Caleb, America
I feel like the anxiety, stress, and depression are not the result of my phone but from the expectations from parents and teachers, how unsafe I feel in my school, from the medication making me “normal and calm,” and from the news where nothing good is heard. I don’t think my phone stops me from socializing or from sleeping, and I am constantly trying to put down my phone. My parents will warn me once or twice but they are on it as much as me.
But I believe that adults try to use phones as a scapegoat instead of admitting that there are bigger issues, such as global warming, political divisions etc. that teens face or the problems that they themselves cause with high expectations.
— Lilian, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC