The Sensuous Pleasures of Handmade Marshmallows
I can’t remember the name of the restaurant, or when I had this meal, which dates it to at least before smartphones and Instagram. I’m pretty sure the chef was French and the meal was dinner. I’m positive that the restaurant was very fancy — fancy enough that the servers wore white gloves. And fanciful enough that the last of the courses was bonbons of many colors, wheeled out on a trolley that could have held a royal wedding cake. There must have been chocolates and lollipops and squares of pâte de fruits (gummy bears’ ritzy relatives), but I had eyes only for the tall, glass, footed apothecary jars with lids shaped like the Kremlin’s pointy domes.
The server set the jars’ tops aside, reached in with silver tongs and lifted a long, chubby white band of powdery marshmallow, snipping off squares with shiny oversize scissors. As far as I can recall, no one at the table clapped, but had they, it would have been for glee: It was all so lovely, a grown-up moment intended to bring back the sweetness of childhood.
For my French friends around the table, the marshmallows invoked a nostalgia for a time when candies were made by hand and buying one from a small shop was a treat. For me, there was no nostalgia, no memory, no reference; the marshmallows were a revelation: pale, soft, even fragile, delicately sweet and almost effervescent — they melted on my tongue. They were unlike anything I’d known that shared the same name. I wanted to call them something different.
I had just that thought a few years later when I tasted the marshmallows Christine Moore created in Pasadena for her Little Flower Candy Company. Moore started her business by making caramels at home, and she was happy to make just caramels — cutting them by hand, wrapping each piece in wax paper, tying packages with ribbons and labeling them with the logo she’d drawn at the kitchen table. “I like making the same thing and doing it well,” she told me. But then in 2001, a friend asked her to bring candies to a fund-raiser in Los Angeles, and while she wanted to say yes, she knew she couldn’t: “It was impossible for me to afford the ingredients, and so I made marshmallows, a table full of them.” Moore’s marshmallows had the same effect on the L.A. chefs who were there as those lanyards of marshmallows had on me. Soon Moore was making caramels and marshmallows, still her only offerings.
After tasting Moore’s marshmallows and following her recipe many times, I’m no less surprised by them now. Knowing how they’re made only adds to their allure: Marshmallows are a lesson in the transformative power of heat and air.
While the ancient Egyptians, who are thought to have been the first to make a mallow sweet, drawing sap from the plant and mixing it with honey, surely had to stir the stiff mass by hand, I advise a heavy-duty mixer. Even then, you’ll be beating for almost 15 minutes, during which time you’ll be mesmerized by what’s happening. The mixture won’t look appealing when you pour boiling sugar syrup over gelatin. But as you beat, it goes from murky to opaque, from beige to pure white, from thin, to thicker, to billowing as it mounts, spinning around the wires of the beater and more than tripling in volume. It peaks and swirls and looks like meringue, even though there are no eggs. It’s beautiful! (It’s also unmanageable until it has had time to set.)
The instant you cut the first marshmallow — I follow Moore’s lead and cut cubes with crisp right-angled corners — you know that you’ve made something singular. The marshmallow is light, of course — Moore says “pillowy.” It’s sturdy enough to stack, sandwich in s’mores or melt in hot chocolate, but it’s tender, with skin as soft as a petal. Press the candy gently, and it will languidly return to form. Handmade marshmallows are sensuous, and so much of the delight is in their texture, which is soft and lithe, almost like custard. They’re sweet — they’re meant to be — but oddly, they’re not all that sweet.
I’m a purist: I flavor my marshmallows with vanilla. But the possibilities for divergence are many. A drop of citrus or herb oil will give you a different taste and aroma. A drop of natural colorant will give you any shade you love. And a package of the candies will most likely spark memories in French friends, probably be a discovery for Americans and almost certainly turn up on Instagram no matter who gets them. And yes, I take a picture of them every time, not for fear of forgetting, but for the pleasure of remembering.

Recipe: Vanilla marshmallows