I Voted for Trump, and I Believe He May Be Guilty of Bribery
I am a Republican and former federal prosecutor who voted for Donald Trump in 2016. But I was deeply dismayed by the way his lawyers defended his misbegotten dealings with Ukraine during the Senate impeachment trial. Unlike Mr. Trump’s supporters, I believe the president might well be guilty of breaking the law.
Even without the additional witnesses and documents that the Senate Republicans refused to subpoena, the evidence available to date has established a prima facie case of bribery, a felony under federal law, against Mr. Trump. The articles of impeachment do not use the word bribery, but the House Judiciary Committee did in a report, and for good reason: The proof is there, for the following reasons.
If the president corruptly demanded or sought anything of value to influence an official act, then he would be guilty of bribery. “In other words, for bribery there must be a quid pro quo — a specific intent to give or receive something of value in exchange for an official act,” the Supreme Court held in United States v. Sun-Diamond Growers of California in 1999.
Federal courts around the country have interpreted “anything of value” to include intangible things — in this case, the announcement by Ukraine of an investigation into former Vice President Joe Biden and his son Hunter. The official action in question to be offered in exchange was the release of American military assistance to Ukraine, a country at war with Russia. That military assistance was unlawfully withheld in contravention of the president’s constitutional obligation to “faithfully execute” the law as Congress enacts it, the United States Government Accountability Office found.
In fleshing out the constitutional requirement of high crimes and misdemeanors, the first article of impeachment tracks the language of bribery, saying that Mr. Trump sought to pressure the government of Ukraine “for corrupt purposes in pursuit of personal political benefit.” Mr. Trump’s lawyer, the Harvard law professor emeritus Alan Dershowitz, asserted that Mr. Trump can be convicted only for conduct “akin” to bribery and treason. Mr. Dershowitz has been wrong on the law many times in this trial, but even by his standard, the articles of impeachment express an impeachable offense.
The key evidence establishes several things. First, as The Times has reported, John Bolton, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, says in a forthcoming book that Mr. Trump directly told him that he wanted to withhold military aid to Ukraine until President Volodymyr Zelensky announced an investigation of the Bidens. (Mr. Trump has denied that.) This so clearly appears to be a quid pro quo that Mr. Trump’s own ambassador to the European Union, Gordon Sondland, actually called it such.
Second, Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, told The Times that the president fired Marie Yovanovitch as ambassador to Ukraine after she tried to impede the efforts to investigate the Bidens. And finally, Mr. Trump, during a phone call on July 25, asked Mr. Zelensky for a “favor” to open investigations not only of the Bidens but also into a widely debunked theory that Ukraine had meddled in the 2016 election.
Despite all this, the Republican-controlled Senate on Wednesday appears all but certain to acquit Mr. Trump. The nation has been denied the chance to witness the impeachment managers and Mr. Trump’s lawyers fully interrogate or defend his behavior. The Senate had a constitutional duty to hold a real trial. Instead we got a show trial.
One more thing concerns me. During the House investigation, Mr. Sondland testified that Mr. Trump told him: “I want nothing. I want no quid pro quo. Tell Zelensky to do the right thing.” To me, a former federal prosecutor who has successfully argued cases before the Supreme Court and handled many organized crime cases, the words “do the right thing” recalled the way mob bosses made an offer that could not be refused — the threat and reward clear but unstated, without explicit incriminating language.
To those who find nothing wrong with the president’s words, I would just note that, according to Supreme Court Justice Anthony M. Kennedy in Evans v. United States in 1992, an official “need not state the quid pro quo in express terms” for a crime to have been committed.
I say all this as a Republican who worked for President Ronald Reagan and voted for Mr. Trump in 2016 because I believed that he would appoint Supreme Court justices who would “say what the law is,” not try to make it. Since then Mr. Trump has done several things that have made me question my choice, including asserting last year that Article II of the Constitution gave him “the right to do whatever I want as president.” That is not the Constitution I know.
As a freshly minted Army lieutenant, I took an oath at West Point that I would “to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.” President Trump took the same oath when he became president. He should abide by it.