How Much Watching Time Do You Have This Weekend?
No matter how much free time you have this weekend, we have TV recommendations for you. Come back every week for new suggestions on what to watch.
‘What Did Jack Do?’
When to watch: Now, on Netflix.
Abandon expectations all ye who enter a David Lynch short film in which he interrogates a talking monkey. It’s a tale of woe, a tale of love, a tale where the monkey’s mouth is replaced by a person’s mouth à la that Conan O’Brien bit from the mid 1990s. It’s also the jolt of poetic surrealism we need right now, a welcome surprise amid the Netflix content glut. If you loved the black-and-white episode of the “Twin Peaks” revival, or if you think Gonzo and Camilla’s romance is one for the ages, watch this.
‘Work in Progress’
When to watch: Sunday at 11 p.m., on Showtime.
I am relieved that this funny, surprising series has been renewed for a second season, especially because Sunday’s season finale is so good. A comfy sense of humor goes a long way, but the show’s real power is its calm precision, its richly developed world that still has these believable moments of hurt and beauty, like photorealistic needlepoint. Abby (played by Abby McEnany, who co-created the semi-autobiographical series) and Chris (Theo Germaine) have another big fight, and like all big fights, it’s not really about what it’s about.
‘My Dream Farm’
When to watch: Now, on Amazon.
Fleeing city life and embracing a pastoral existence: It’s not just for Instagrammable fantasies anymore. Well, actually, it still is, and this five-part British series from 2010 serves as a good reminder that small-scale farming is a tremendous undertaking. Get ready to learn about pig mange, for example, and the need to follow local building ordinances lest your would-be alpaca farm violate the law. Still, this show is mostly Monty Don giving gentle guidance and nonjudgmental suggestions. And advice like “get to know your neighbors” and “educate yourself about relevant issues” is as valuable in the concrete jungle as it is on a fledgling flower farm.