Top Latino Mayoral Hopeful in New York City Drops Out
For nearly his entire adult life, Ruben Diaz Jr. had seemed to be on a one-way path to political stardom.
At the age of 22, he was elected to the New York State Assembly. A dozen or so years later, he was elected as Bronx borough president. Political insiders speculated just how high Mr. Diaz might rise.
In 2018, Mr. Diaz seemed to offer an answer, becoming the first candidate to file papers declaring his interest in the 2021 New York City Democratic primary for mayor. His chances seemed formidable: He had the backing of the powerful Bronx Democratic Party; an alliance with the more powerful governor, Andrew M. Cuomo; and presumed support from Latino voters.
But for more than a year, Mr. Diaz said that something did not feel right. He would attend fund-raisers, shake voters’ hands and sit for portraits.
All this, he said he had thought to himself, “for the guy who is not running for mayor.”
Mr. Diaz, 46, has decided to withdraw from the mayor’s race, telling The New York Times in an interview that he does not plan to seek any public office once his term as borough president runs out in 2021.
He said the primary reason for dropping out was that he wanted to spend more time with his family than would be possible, either as mayor or borough president.
“You miss out on a lot,” Mr. Diaz said of his wife and two sons. “I want to hang out with them more.”
The decision — which Mr. Diaz has not shared with most members of his staff or colleagues — comes as the mayor’s race is taking firmer shape.
His departure leaves Eric Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, as the only major candidate of color; Mr. Adams is black. The two other leading candidates are white: the city comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, and the City Council speaker, Corey Johnson.
And although the Democratic primary for mayor is more than a year away, Mr. Diaz seemed to be ceding ground to his rivals.
Since July, he has raised about $94,000, and has spent $102,000. Mr. Stringer, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Adams have each raised at least three times that amount, and have spent tens of thousands of dollars less. Mr. Diaz does have about $900,000 in his campaign war chest, but Mr. Adams and Mr. Stringer each have more than $2 million; Mr. Johnson has nearly $700,000.
Mr. Diaz said that he has eased off on fund-raising efforts as he wrestled with whether to proceed with a campaign.
“I cannot continue to pretend to folks, ask them for money, ask them to support me when after, really thinking about this and feeling it and doing soul-searching and speaking with my family, I know I’m not giving it 100 percent,” he said.
Mr. Diaz said he will return all donations that he has raised for this race, and hopes his supporters will rally around another candidate.
“I’m doing it now so my supporters have ample time to recalibrate on whatever they want to do in terms of other candidates,” Mr. Diaz said. “I’m at peace with it.”
Carl Heastie, the New York State Assembly speaker and a close friend of Mr. Diaz’s, said he was “disappointed” not to see the Bronx borough president become the next mayor. But, Mr. Heastie said, “I wasn’t surprised.”
“These things are personal,” he said. Before becoming speaker, Mr. Heastie said he, too, had a “fleeting thought” about leaving public office. At the time, he had served 14 years as a member of the Assembly. He was also the Democratic County leader in the Bronx, and his daughter was just 5 years old. “It is time that you can’t make up,” he said.
Still, Mr. Diaz’s reason was met with some skepticism.
Christina Greer, an associate professor of political science at Fordham University, said, “Anyone who wants to dedicate themselves to spending more time with their family, I respect that. Some constituents may respect that, or find it curious since his children are grown.”
Mr. Diaz’s youngest son, Ryan, is in the Army and stationed in Germany. His older son, also named Ruben, lives in the Bronx. Mr. Diaz described his relationship with his children as harmonious, but remote.
“I haven’t seen my youngest, I’ve seen him three days in over the last 380 days,” he said. “Ruben lives in the West Bronx and I see Ruben every other week? He lives right here.”
Mr. Diaz said that he expected his decision to no longer seek public office to be greeted with suspicion of some hidden, less savory motive.
Paul J. Del Duca, Mr. Diaz’s chief of staff and senior strategic adviser, said that if there were some potential legal problem lurking, “We would never be giving the money back,” referring to the political donations.
Mr. Diaz echoed Mr. Del Duca’s sentiment, quickly adding, “I’m giving the money back. Who does that?”
His defection from the mayor’s race will still leave one member of his family in politics: His father, Ruben Diaz Sr., a Pentecostal minister who opposes same-sex marriage and has had a history of anti-gay remarks, is a city councilman running for Congress.
Mr. Diaz said he has not told his father of his plans to leave public office and not run for mayor, admitting he did not trust that his decision would be held in confidence.
Mr. Diaz demurred when asked if he thought his father took his son’s political interests to heart. “He would say he does,” he said. “Some would question that.”