Andrew Friedman, Michael Zuckerman
Andrew Jason Friedman and Michael Alan Zuckerman were married Feb. 1 at the Dalcy, an events space in the Fulton Market district in Chicago. Dr. Nicholas Konowitz, who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated, with Andrey Spektor participating in a ceremony with Jewish traditions.
Mr. Friedman (left), 28, will take the surname Zuckerman. He works in Chicago as the senior vice president for operations and human resources at Imagination, a content marketing agency in Chicago. He graduated magna cum laude from Emerson College and received a master’s degree in human resources from N.Y.U.
He is a son of Linda F. Friedman of Deerfield, Ill., and Michael S. Friedman of Northbrook, Ill. His mother works in Chicago and Tokyo as the executive vice president and general counsel at Astellas Pharma, a company based in Tokyo. His father is the chief information officer at the Comprehensive Pain Management clinic in Des Plaines, Ill.
Mr. Zuckerman, 35, is a clinical assistant professor of law focusing on legal writing and analysis at Northwestern Pritzker School of Law in Chicago. He graduated from Cornell, from which he also received a law degree cum laude.
He is a son of Sheri B. Zuckerman and Sherwin A. Zuckerman of Glencoe, Ill. His mother retired as an early childhood educator at Glencoe Park District, an early childhood center in Glencoe, Ill. She is a lifetime trustee of the Erikson Institute in Chicago, a graduate school focusing on child development. His father is the executive chairman at Zuckerman Investment Group, a family-owned wealth management firm in Chicago.
Mr. Zuckerman’s previous marriage ended in divorce.
The couple met in 2016, and became close friends, while volunteering at the Jewish United Fund in Chicago. Mr. Friedman proposed to Mr. Zuckerman during a weekend trip to Verona, Italy, where he got down on one knee under Juliet’s balcony, a tourist spot there. “What’s more romantic than that,” said Mr. Zuckerman, who said “yes,” in front of a big crowd of tourists at sunset.