Buying a Mattress in an Actual Store? That’s So 2010.
BILLION DOLLAR BRAND CLUB
How Dollar Shave Club, Warby Parker and Other Disruptors Are Remaking What We Buy
By Lawrence Ingrassia
In the early 2010s, entrepreneurs started to realize something: If they didn’t like their mattress, bra, hearing aids, contact lenses or just about any other consumer product, they could start their own company and make a lot of money selling a different, better — or sometimes worse — version. It wasn’t even always that the original product was deficient. Maybe the experience of shopping for it was a nightmare or the retail price was unnecessarily high.
Technology was creating new opportunities to shake up industries that for decades had seemed impenetrable. Entrepreneurs without deep pockets, for instance, could find reliable, inexpensive manufacturers to do small runs of new products that they could sell online, without the hassle and expense of setting up traditional brick-and-mortar shops. The disruption boom was on.
Some of these companies are now household names, like Bonobos, Dollar Shave Club, Warby Parker and Casper. Some were bought by larger companies for millions — even billions — of dollars. In “Billion Dollar Brand Club,” the veteran business journalist Lawrence Ingrassia (a former editor at The New York Times) ferrets out the most compelling, consequential stories and people behind the direct-to-consumer revolution. He weaves riveting tales of legacy brands caught resting on their laurels, the hungry newcomers who outsmarted them and a network of prescient investors working behind the scenes.
In less capable hands, “Billion Dollar Brand Club” could read like a series of dry business-school case studies, but Ingrassia’s keen storytelling and painstaking reporting ensure a far different fate for readers. In particular, the ascent of Dollar Shave Club (the company from which the book borrows its name) has the pacing of a literary thriller. Although many details of co-founder Michael Dubin’s rags-to-tens-of-millions story have been covered by other journalists, Ingrassia goes granular, in a good way. We hear from Dubin’s friend’s father, who helped hatch the idea for Dollar Shave; the pal from his improv acting days who directed a now-legendary marketing video that Dubin wrote and starred in; and former executives at Gillette who admit that top brass at the razor giant long pooh-poohed Dollar Shave, which was bought by Unilever in 2016 for $1 billion in cash.
What Ingrassia dubs “the mattress wars” does in fact live up to his billing of a “raucous, bare-knuckle brawl” between the market behemoth Serta Simmons and dozens of upstarts, including Casper and Tuft & Needle. The first shot in that rivalry was fired in 2012 by a pair of aspiring entrepreneurs who couldn’t shake a terrible mattress purchase one of them had recently endured and who penned a “hate list” of all the worst aspects: overly aggressive salespeople, a confusing menu of products, high markups, and pricey delivery and returns. Soon they were cutting open that mattress — eviscerating it in the name of research — and starting Tuft & Needle, through which they sold inexpensive boxed-up foam mattresses directly to consumers via their website.
Initially, Tuft & Needle’s competition with Casper was friendly. “I went partying with them,” JT Marino, a Tuft & Needle co-founder, tells Ingrassia. “I told them, ‘We’re going to turn this industry upside down,’ he says. After a pause, he adds, ‘We ended up becoming enemies.’”
Marino and his partner did just fine for themselves: Serta Simmons bought Tuft & Needle in 2018 for an estimated $400 million to $500 million. Since they hadn’t raised money from investors, as the Casper founders did, they walked away with most of that money.
Selling big is one thing, but whether most of these companies actually turn a profit is the rare blind spot in Ingrassia’s reporting. He does address it vis-à-vis the mattress showdown, saying that Tuft & Needle claims it’s always been profitable, but that 2019 could be the first year Casper posts a small profit. It’s an important detail that informs another big question: whether we’re heading into a direct-to-consumer bubble. If we believe Ingrassia’s sources, it’s quite the opposite. He writes, “The revolution, as they see it, has just begun.”