Depression and Anxiety in a Polarized Time
To the Editor:
Re “Why Is America So Depressed?” (Op-Ed, Jan. 3):
Lee Siegel cites statistics showing alarming increases in anxiety, depression and suicide in the United States, noting (rightly) that the actual numbers would be even higher if they included those who suffer in silence. He attributes this increase in part to the “frightening environment” in which we live. In fact, the World Health Organization identifies depression as a leading cause of disability worldwide.
But his personal story is a good-news story. He acknowledged his illness and he obtained help, though not easily. And then he identified things to live for, to help him find the positive when feeling swallowed up by the negative.
Many stresses (climate change, the culture of violence, the perils of the internet) are worldwide. The United States is a big part of that world, and we need strong leaders to guide us. But while we debate about our polarized country, we should individually take our own emotional pulse, know what our risk factors are, and seek help, preferably before hitting the wall.
John M. Oldham
Houston
The writer, chief of staff at the Menninger Clinic, is a past president of the American Psychiatric Association.
To the Editor:
Lee Siegel writes courageously about his struggles with depression and suicidal thinking. While many in the mental health field have questioned President Trump’s fitness to serve, Mr. Siegel touches on a way in which Mr. Trump poses a danger to our country: He is bad for our mental health.
For half the country, this means increased rates of depression and anxiety along with feelings of despair and helplessness and, I imagine, increased levels of cortisol, a stress hormone. For rabid Trump supporters, it means a loss of conscience and a full embrace of living in a world of made-up facts. How else to make sense of the enormous evangelical support this amoral president garners?
Many argue that Donald Trump is the symptom rather than the cause of our predicament. Yet it is hard not to wonder how different our world would be if the most qualified person ever to run for the office of presidency had been elected.
Larry S. Sandberg
New York
The writer is a clinical associate professor of psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College.
[If you are having thoughts of suicide, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 (TALK) or go to SpeakingOfSuicide.com/resources for a list of additional resources.]
To the Editor:
Re “Carefully Nourishing a Dying Language” (news article, Jan. 8):
You quote Ross Perlin, a linguistics professor at Columbia University, as saying: “Languages are not dying a natural death. They’re disappearing because people have been marginalized and pressured and made to feel bad to speak their language.”
I see this daily when I talk with clients in my organization, which helps integrate immigrants into their new communities. I also experienced this myself, as the child of immigrants who came to this country speaking Spanish.
When new arrivals are pressed to speak only English, native languages and dialects fade away. This is a tragic loss because with those languages go precious aspects of a people’s history and culture.
This is just one of many reasons for schools to offer dual language education. Another is that we will better prepare our children to succeed in an increasingly multicultural world.
Carola Otero Bracco
Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The writer is executive director of Neighbors Link.