After Six Years in Office, New York’s Mayor Vows to ‘Save Our City’
A call to “Save Our City” might make more sense as a campaign slogan for a newcomer running for office in a city in steep decline, rather than a theme for a mayor in his seventh year in office, presiding over a booming New York.
Yet Mayor Bill de Blasio embraced this message in his State of the City speech on Thursday, laying out a series of plans to help calm New Yorkers’ growing anxieties.
Even as the city is in the midst of record lows in crime and an economic surge, it feels less affordable than ever. The homeless crisis is visible on street corners and in subway cars. Concerns about shootings and anti-Semitism are growing. Cyclists are regularly getting run over on city streets.
With two years left in office, Mr. de Blasio acknowledged that he had plenty of unfinished business, including helping small businesses and making the city more affordable.
“New York City is the greatest city in the world, but many New Yorkers have real fears that the city they love is slipping away,” the mayor said. “From making pre-K universal to creating the safest big city in America, we have accomplished so much together, but we need to go much farther.”
The mayor pledged to legalize basement apartments to increase the city’s supply of affordable housing and to take more aggressive measures to improve street safety. He also wants to help “mom-and-pop” shops by reducing fines and approving a tax on landlords who keep storefronts vacant while waiting for high-end tenants like banks and chain pharmacies.
The speech had a format that mirrored the dozens of town halls the mayor has held while in office. Mr. de Blasio encouraged feedback from the audience, which was seated beneath a 94-foot-long blue whale at the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan. He asked them to raise their hands if they were afraid that they would be the last generation of their family to be able to afford living in New York and if a store in their neighborhood had gone out of business. Many raised hands and nodded heads.
“This is a plan to save our city,” the mayor said as he announced new community centers and an expansion of free preschool. “And I thought long and hard about whether those words were called for, but they are.”
Still, the theme raised some questions: Save the city from whom or what exactly? (“Forces of greed,” for starters, the mayor argued.) And why didn’t Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat in his second term, start the battle earlier in his administration?
“It’s more like ‘Save My Mayoralty,’” said Chris Coffey, a former aide to Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and a political consultant at Tusk Ventures. “He’ll need a robust agenda to do that. More important than what he says today is what he does over the next two years.”
Mr. de Blasio said he is energized after running for president last year and wants to tackle big problems like reducing homelessness and overhauling the property tax system.
But some wonder how much he can get done as a lame duck mayor with an increasingly independent City Council. Much of his agenda also depends on help from state leaders in Albany, including Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who has quarreled with Mr. de Blasio.
Rather than focusing only on the “tale of two cities” theme that propelled him into office in 2014, the mayor sought to appeal to a broader swath of New Yorkers who are worried about public safety, climate change and small businesses that are struggling to pay rent, like Neir’s Tavern, a 190-year-old bar in Queens that the mayor helped save from closing.
Immigrants in New York often rely on a shadow city of illegal underground apartments that are squalid and dangerous. Mr. de Blasio wants to change zoning laws and to finance low interest loans to help homeowners create safe basement apartments on their properties in an effort to add 10,000 housing units over the next decade.
On street safety, Mr. de Blasio plans to create a new “Vision Zero Unit” at the Police Department with 100 officers dedicated to catching drivers who speed and run red lights. The team is named after one of his signature policies, Vision Zero, which aims to eliminate traffic deaths by 2024.
But pedestrian and cyclist deaths increased last year, raising concerns about whether the traffic safety plan is working. Mr. de Blasio also plans to install 1,000 new lights, stop signs and speed bumps near schools to make them safer.
Mr. de Blasio announced an expansion of preschool for 3-year-olds, known as 3-K for All, to new neighborhoods, including in central Bronx and Williamsburg in Brooklyn. Shortly after he was elected, the mayor introduced a popular universal prekindergarten program for 4-year-olds.
Some of the mayor’s rivals questioned his theme of saving New York City.
“If there’s anything we need saving from, it’s the city’s part-time focus on our full-blown affordability crisis,” said Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller who is running for mayor in 2021 and recently unveiled his own affordable housing proposal.
Corey Johnson, the speaker of the City Council who is also running for mayor, said the Council already has plans to address some issues raised by the mayor, such as commercial rent control and converting school buses to run on electricity.
“I’m not sure I’d frame it as saving our city. This is not the 1970s where we are on the brink of financial ruin,” Mr. Johnson said, before adding: “This is the greatest city in the world.”
Jumaane Williams, the city’s public advocate, said in a live-streamed rebuttal that he was impressed by the mayor’s energy and progressive proposals.
“I haven’t seen this mayor in many years,” he said, “but I’m glad he’s here.”