What California’s History Textbooks Tell Us
Good morning.
(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)
It’s a rivalry that feels at once inevitable and arbitrary, timeless and very rooted in our hyperpartisan era: California versus Texas.
Over the weekend, my colleague Dana Goldstein published an in-depth analysis of American history textbooks used in California and Texas schools. Though they came from the same publishers, they’re different in ways that are informed by politics.
On Monday, I talked with Dana about the project, why she picked California and Texas, and what she’ll be watching going forward. Here’s our conversation:
Can you briefly tell me a bit more about how the project came about?
I got the idea for this story at the very beginning of 2019, when I did a previous story, which was about the state of Michigan and how it had a huge battle between conservatives and liberals about how to define what should be taught in social studies classrooms.
And while I was doing that piece, I visited some schools and I went into a history classroom and I saw this teacher had a textbook and it was completely marked up, like she had stuck sticky tags all over it, and underlined and highlighted stuff. And I thought, “The textbook is still important.”
You also mentioned that there were things in both sets of textbooks that wouldn’t have been emphasized when you or I were in school.
Yeah, they have changed a lot. And although the project focuses on the differences between the two states, there were mostly similarities. And I give both states credit for giving a much fuller picture of American history than I remember from 20 years ago. That includes Native American displacement and slavery. All of that was much richer than it was even five years ago.
How much of that is driven by California specifically and previous discussions about curriculum?
California is a really natural state to focus on. It’s obviously the biggest state and also the quintessential blue state right now.
Beyond that, I have been covering the influence that progressive activism is having on curriculum in California. I had done the previous story about the ethnic studies debate. But even before that, there was the adoption of this massive doorstop, encyclopedic framework for the social sciences, which is 842 pages long. It’s truly a remarkable document.
It goes into great detail on everything from the Japanese and Filipino contributions to national and California history and this really groundbreaking through-line of L.G.B.T.Q. history.
California is unique in that it has a document like this and that it is kind of at the cutting edge of what we might be teaching teenagers about in school.
Tell me a little about how you see all this moving forward. Are the differences likely to widen or narrow?
California is one of a few states that have been going in this more progressive direction. There are changes in Illinois and New York to kind of talk about sex and sexuality more openly in the curriculum for topics.
In Texas, they have had some changes in recent years; for example, they have clarified that slavery was a leading cause — it’s still not, unfortunately, the leading cause — of the Civil War. So that’s something that a lot of people have commented on as a live-wire debate in terms of Texas standards.
But the books themselves do not differ very much on slavery or the Civil War. When I started the project, I expect that to be a dividing line. And I think what’s coming next for Texas is more debate as they elect their school board, because the school board in Texas is really powerful.
What will you be paying attention to in California?
I think the implementation of ethnic studies standards is going to be a really important story going forward in California. And then I’m also going to be looking for any conservative backlash to these changes.
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
“Surprising” no longer feels like the right word to describe the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences’s snubbing of a robust roster of women filmmakers and actors of color in its Oscar nominations.
But as my colleague Nicole Sperling reported, Greta Gerwig, the Sacramento-bred director of “Little Women,” wasn’t as mad as Twitter was about her omission from the directing category. (The movie itself nabbed six nods.)
Still, she took a moment to ruminate on how and which kinds of narratives are deemed worthy and why.
“I think it’s interesting what feels important,” she told Nicole.
On that note, the Korean director Bong Joon Ho’s “Parasite” also picked up six nominations.
He talked with my colleague Reggie Ugwu about the film and how he suspected it wasn’t entirely a coincidence that the Korean-American actor John Cho was chosen to read off the nominees.
Nevertheless, he told Reggie, “We don’t make films for continents or countries — filmmakers create films for their personal dreams and obsessions.”
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.