Hunting Conference With Beach Boys and Trump Jr. Draws Protests
A hunting conference in Reno, Nev., this week was drawing online protests, with Brian Wilson, a co-founder of the Beach Boys, asking fans to join him in signing a petition protesting the group’s performance on Wednesday.
The petition, on Change.org, was called “Tell the Beach Boys to Say No to Trophy Hunting!” and noted that Donald Trump Jr. is a speaker at Safari Club International Convention, which begins on Wednesday. It also includes a photo of Mr. Trump with his brother Eric Trump, both of whom are avid hunters. The petition had more than 120,000 signatures as of Wednesday afternoon.
Trump Jr. is scheduled to speak on Saturday, according to Safari Club International. He will also be part of an auction for a seven-day hunt in Alaska for Sitka black-tailed deer and sea ducks, according to the program for the convention, which will feature exhibitors showcasing the latest guns and hunting equipment, as well as seminars and auctions for hunting trips.
On Twitter on Monday, Mr. Wilson said he learned that the Beach Boys touring group — which is led by another co-founder, Mike Love, who holds the license to the Beach Boys name — would be headlining the convention and that “this organization supports trophy hunting,” which he is “emphatically opposed to.”
“There’s nothing we can do personally to stop the show, so please join us in signing the petition,” Mr. Wilson added, linking to the petition.
Safari Club International is a nonprofit group that describes itself on its website as protecting the freedom to hunt and promoting wildlife conservation. In a statement on Tuesday, the group said the organization “is and always will be equally dedicated to both the conservation of wildlife and the right to free speech guaranteed by the First Amendment. As such, we support the right of anti-hunting petitioners to protest our convention, but we hope they understand how much more they could achieve by working with us instead of against us.”
The petition, created by a user in England, said, “Wouldn’t it be nice if all the Beach Boys, stayed away from those who kill for fun?”
It also called on fans to boycott the band’s music and concerts until the Beach Boys withdraw from the convention and “publicly state their opposition to this ‘sick’ sport of killing animals for ‘fun.’”
“Don is looking forward to his speech at the Safari Club convention and is proud to add Brian Wilson to the list of liberal Hollywood elites who he has successfully triggered,” Andy Surabian, a spokesman for Mr. Trump, said on Tuesday.
In a statement, Mr. Love said that “we look forward to a night of great music in Reno and, as always, support freedom of thought and expression as a fundamental tenet of our rights as Americans.”
Mr. Wilson did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Tuesday.
The Humane Society of the United States recently criticized the conference, describing the event as a gathering of people who “celebrate the senseless killing, buying and selling of dead animals for bragging rights.”
The Beach Boys were founded in 1961 by three teenage brothers — Brian, Carl and Dennis Wilson — their cousin Mr. Love, and a friend, Al Jardine, according to the band’s website.
In 1965, Bruce Johnston joined the band when Brian Wilson focused on writing and producing for the group.
The group has had a wave of memorable hits including “California Girls,” “Good Vibrations” and “Help Me Rhonda.” Mr. Wilson stopped working with the band in the 1980s. The band had another hit in 1988 with “Kokomo,” which was featured in the Tom Cruise movie “Cocktail.”
Dennis Wilson died in 1983, but after Carl Wilson died in 1998, the members ended up representing different factions of the band, with Mr. Love and Mr. Johnston in one and Mr. Jardine and Mr. Wilson in another. In 2012, the band reunited for a tour to celebrate its 50th anniversary.