The Week in Business: A Former Auto Titan’s Shocking Escape
The new decade did not come quietly. Stocks soared on their first day of trading in 2020, but then fell on Friday after President Trump ordered the assassination of a powerful Iranian general, stoking fears that a larger geopolitical conflict could be around the corner. It’s going to be an interesting year.
Did you really think that Carlos Ghosn, the former head of the Nissan-Renault auto alliance who was known in France as “le cost killer,” would go quietly to his trial for financial crimes in Tokyo this year? Instead, he pulled off a slick escape from the Japanese police and fled to Lebanon via private jet. (Yes, it sounds movie-worthy, and yes, he tried to pitch his story to a Hollywood producer.) Last Monday, he released a statement maintaining his innocence and claiming that he was a victim of Japan’s “rigged” legal system. International authorities are investigating how he managed to pull this off.
As of Jan. 1, a new California law requires companies to treat contractors like employees if their work is a regular part of the company’s business. That means thousands of gig workers could be eligible for workers’ compensation and unemployment insurance, among other protections. While this law would theoretically provide freelancers with much-needed stability, it’s throwing California’s gig economy into turmoil. Uber and Postmates, which rely on independent drivers and delivery people for their business models to function, took legal action last Monday to block the legislation from being applied to their own workers. (The law could cause Uber’s labor costs to balloon by 20 to 30 percent.) How the lawsuit plays out could potentially affect other states’ treatment of gig workers.
The Food and Drug Administration has stepped up enforcement of its rule against the sale of most flavored e-cigarette pods, which are blamed for luring millions of children into vaping. But the initiative is somewhat of a compromise with the tobacco industry. It still allows the sale of menthol and tobacco-flavored vaping cartridges, which aren’t as popular with teens. (Vaping advocates lobbied to keep these products on the market by arguing that they are a better alternative to cigarettes.) The rule also doesn’t apply to flavored liquid nicotine for larger vaping devices with refillable tanks, which are widely available in vape shops but aren’t as sleek or discreet as their pod-based counterparts. Companies have 30 days to comply.
Ever a fan of pomp, President Trump announced a signing ceremony for the “Phase 1” China trade deal at the White House on Jan. 15. He said that “high-level representatives of China” would attend but did not say who. And while he called the deal “very large and comprehensive,” details still have not been released. The agreement took almost two years to negotiate and marks a truce in the protracted trade war between the world’s two largest economies. Mr. Trump said that he would travel to Beijing “at a later date” to start talks for a larger, more comprehensive “Phase 2” agreement.
Amid rising tensions with Tehran, Mr. Trump ordered an airstrike that killed Qassim Suleimani, Iran’s ruthless security and intelligence commander. It was a bold move — some would say reckless — and Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, vowed revenge. Global markets fell in reaction to the news on Friday, with oil prices rising sharply. The killing has provoked anxieties of a larger conflict that could drag in other countries. The Middle East supplies 25 percent of the world’s oil, and Iran borders a critical passage for petroleum transportation.
The British Parliament will resume sessions this week to debate Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s Brexit agreement. But now that Mr. Johnson’s party holds a sweeping government majority, his deal is expected to move along quickly, although it probably won’t pass in time for the Jan. 31 deadline. It remains to be seen whether Britain’s departure from the European Union will leave its economy better off. But for now, the British pound is looking strong and the country seems confident. And Mr. Johnson’s opposition, the left-leaning Labour Party, hasn’t looked this weak in decades. It is looking for a new leader since its former head, Jeremy Corbyn, was trounced in the December election.
HBO’s former chief executive, Richard Plepler, left the company after 27 years when it was bought by AT&T. Now he’s back in the business, but for a competitor — Apple TV Plus — where he’s signed a five-year contract to produce television series, documentaries and feature films. Amazon, meanwhile, is dealing with a public relations crisis after two employees reported that they were told they would be fired if they continued to publicly criticize the company for its environmental policies. And in more sobering news, a recent study found that opioid-related deaths rise in areas where auto plants had closed five years earlier.
Was this newsletter forwarded to you? Sign up here.