How to Deal With Grief at the Office
Send questions about the office, money, careers and work-life balance to workfriend@nytimes.com. Include your name and location, even if you want them withheld. Letters may be edited.
Before doing anything else: Schedule an appointment with a therapist. Neither your boss nor your newspaper columnist is a viable substitute for a mental health care professional. Exploring your distress with a trained guide could help you recalibrate in the wake of this death. PsychologyToday.com and other sites have therapist search tools that allow you to filter by factors like location, insurance and specialization. Select “grief.”
Few environments are less conducive to grieving than the average American office, devoid of privacy and irradiated with fluorescent lighting. We do not have good norms for grieving at work. In fact, since the practice of wearing mourning garb for prolonged periods fell out of favor around World War I, we have not really had any norms for grieving anywhere. Today, employees are lucky if we receive three paid days off for the death of an immediate family member, after which we are gently expected to return to work and make our colleagues uncomfortable for the foreseeable future. (Is it O.K. yet to instant message him office gossip? Or is he still upset that his sister died?) Grief is like an injury; workplaces should make more room for it. Of course, they should also offer good parental leave. It’s all mostly dreams at this point.
It can be a source of great distress — and stress — to not feel supported by your boss. But it sounds like you’re expecting a lot from this man, and resenting him for a reasonably professional reaction to the news that an employee’s former boss died several weeks ago. (Of course, while emotional support peaks in the immediate aftermath of an event and dwindles over time, grief is not necessarily linear.) Your high-key reaction to his low-key reaction may be making your boss apprehensive to get personal with you, creating a cycle of perpetual dissatisfaction for both.
The only person you should rely on to support you 100 percent is you. Your boss’s job is not to offer you unconditional comfort and encouragement; it’s to make sure you’re doing your job, which is to perform work tasks the way he expects. If you can’t, that’s on you to manage by, for instance, going to therapy or seeking out a grief support group. You cannot make your emotional labor a collaborative project with co-workers.
If you truly feel your workplace is cold to the degree that you can no longer handle being present, look for a new job. If you don’t want to leave, you should discuss with a therapist how to communicate with your boss before he decides independently it would be best for you to go.
This is the beauty of supervisors: They run interference with scary people in exchange for better titles and salaries than their subordinates. It’s easy to prioritize an underresourced workplace’s interests over your own, especially if you admire its purpose. Work, however, will not reciprocate selflessness. It will become accustomed to it. You owe only your agreed-upon terms of notice. (Maybe your contract requires two weeks in exchange for paying out unused vacation?) It was considerate to loop your supervisor in early. Since you two have a good relationship, keep him updated. He can worry about what, when and how to tell the board.
Be grateful you are not on your period and say nothing.