New & Noteworthy, From Paul Krugman to the Romantic Age
ARGUING WITH ZOMBIES: Economics, Politics, and the Fight for a Better Future, by Paul Krugman. (Norton, $29.95.) Krugman, who won the 2008 Nobel Prize in Economics, has for two decades used his New York Times column to explore the intersection of politics and the economy, as this expansive collection illustrates.
FRANCHISE: The Golden Arches in Black America, by Marcia Chatelain. (Liveright, $28.95.) Chatelain’s surprising history traces the active but little-known role that fast food companies played in black empowerment after Martin Luther King Jr.’s assassination.

THE FORCE OF NONVIOLENCE: The Ethical in the Political, by Judith Butler. (Verso, $24.95.) As a strategy of resistance and protest, nonviolence is often seen as passive and resolutely individual. Butler’s philosophical inquiry argues that it is in fact a shrewd and even aggressive collective political tactic.
THE MAKING OF POETRY: Coleridge, the Wordsworths, and Their Year of Marvels, by Adam Nicolson. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) Why was the year and a half from June 1797 to September 1798 so productive for the great Romantics? Nicolson investigates.
THE GNOME STORIES, by Ander Monson. (Graywolf, paper, $16.) Eleven uncanny tales of trauma and loneliness: A man’s girlfriend is cryogenically frozen after a car crash; a woman and her robot are hired out to erase memories.
It’s taken me six weeks, gripped and appalled, to read Christopher Browning’s ORDINARY MEN: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland. The subject matter is painful: how 500 middle-aged policemen, mostly from Hamburg, descended into massacring Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland. Just as painful are the questions that Browning asks about what can turn outwardly unexceptional people into perpetrators of terrible crimes. He uses the postwar accounts of the police officers to argue that it did not take ideological fanatics to carry out mass murder. Most members of the battalion were not veteran Nazis, and they had chances to opt out of killing without serious punishment. Still, peer pressure and deference to authority meant few dropped out from massacring Jews. “I must answer that no one wants to be thought a coward,” one of the officers said to explain why he kept killing.
—Chris Buckley, chief China correspondent