Lesson of the Day: ‘The Machines Are Learning, and So Are the Students’
Featured Article: “The Machines Are Learning, and So Are the Students” by Craig S. Smith
Artificial intelligence-powered programs are already being used by teachers and students across the country and the world.
In this lesson, you will learn about how A.I. is changing schools and classrooms across the globe and how its presence today is believed to be just the beginning of a much larger trend. In a Going Further activity, you will imagine what A.I.-powered education will look like in 2040.
How will A.I. change the world of education? Will it be for the good?
What do you know about artificial intelligence or A.I.? Are you excited by its potential? Confused by its meaning? Worried about its misuse?
(For an overview on A.I., you can read this article or watch this video.)
Have you, your teachers or your school ever used A.I. to enhance your educational experience? If yes, how has it affected or benefited your learning?
Our featured article details many of the ways that A.I. is being used in educational settings.
Before reading, take five minutes to brainstorm a list of the ways you think A.I. might be able to enhance the quality of education for teachers, students and schools. Include examples of ways that A.I. is already being used as well as ways that might be theoretical or even fanciful.
Afterward, share and discuss your list with a partner.
Reflect and discuss together: Which ideas from your list do you think you would personally benefit from most? What scenarios do you believe are most likely to become a reality in schools within five to 10 years? Which are far-off in the distant future?
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. How has the artificial intelligence-powered program Bakpax transformed Jennifer Turner’s algebra classes?
2. How has the machine-learning revolution over the past seven years changed the educational landscape? How is machine learning allowing for greater “personalization” in teaching and learning?
3. How has digital teaching and learning changed since the first computer tutoring systems appeared in the 1960s? How is the “machine-learning” revolution different from past computer teaching systems based on “rule-based artificial intelligence” or “decision trees”? Explain in your own words how each of the three approaches works.
4. How is A.I. changing the test preparation market, a multibillion-dollar global industry?
5. Why does the author believe that “the world will still need schools, classrooms and teachers” in the future? What will teachers still be needed for even in our A.I.-enhanced future?
6. Why do some people, like Dr. Terrence Sejnowski, believe that the challenge for A.I.-aided learning is not the technology, but “bureaucratic barriers that protect the status quo”? Why might educational “gatekeepers” be threatened by A.I.?
Choose one or both of the following two writing activities:
1) Tell us about your views about A.I and education.
2) Make a prediction about the future of A.I. and education.
Mr. Smith writes:
What will education look like in 2040 — when perhaps your own children will be in school? Will it look largely the same as today or will A.I. have completely reinvented what teaching and learning look like? Do you think A.I. will ever replace teachers completely — or even the need for places called schools as we know them?
In 200 words or fewer, describe the schools of tomorrow. If you are inspired, draw or illustrate a scene (or scenes) from a school of the future.
Need more information to help make your predictions? Here are some additional articles on artificial intelligence from The New York Times:
A Breakthrough for A.I. Technology: Passing an 8th-Grade Science Test
With $1 Billion From Microsoft, an A.I. Lab Wants to Mimic the Brain
If a Robotic Hand Solves a Rubik’s Cube, Does It Prove Something?
‘There’s Just No Doubt That It Will Change the World’: David Chalmers on V.R. and A.I.
And here are some from outside sources:
What’s The Future Of AI In Education? 17 Experts Share Their Insights | DisruptorDaily.com
Artificial Intelligence, Authentic Impact: How Educational AI is Making the Grade | EdTech Magazine