9 New Books We Recommend This Week
Almost half of the authors we recommend this week are dead, which is bad luck for them but further proof that books can live long past their writers — millenniums past in some cases, as in Sun Tzu’s timeless guide “The Art of War,” at the top of our list in a new translation. Also dead, also translated: the Croatian novelist Dasa Drndic (1946-2018), whose work began getting its due in English toward the end of her life; her latest to arrive on these shores is “Doppelgänger.” Then we have a couple of posthumous collections: stories by Larry Brown (1951-2004) and essays by Brian Doyle (1956-2017), all of them pulsing with life.
On this side of the mortal coil, we recommend a close study of Jamaica’s cultural and political place in the world, a kinetic poetry collection alert to the restlessness of the digital age, a look at the ways Jewish people helped shape Western society over the course of a century, and an anthology of essays celebrating Charles M. Schulz’s “Peanuts” comics. Finally, we go full circle with a living author who takes death as his subject: For the essays in “The Depositions,” Thomas Lynch draws on his long career as an undertaker in small-town Michigan.
Gregory Cowles
Senior Editor, Books
Twitter: @GregoryCowles
THE ART OF WAR, by Sun Tzu. Translated by Michael Nylan. (Norton, $24.95.) There have been many translations of this venerable guide, written some 2,500 years ago, and Michael Nylan’s will not be the last. Sun Tzu’s book seems perpetually useful because it’s a work of philosophy as much as tactics, and it suggests that the real art of war is not to have to go to war. Nylan’s translation is “marvelously pointy and plain-spoken,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. “Each sentence is a struck match.”
DOPPELGÄNGER, by Dasa Drndic. Translated by S. D. Curtis and Celia Hawkesworth. (New Directions, paper, $15.95.) The gory, majestic work of the Croatian novelist Dasa Drndic, who died in 2018 at 71, was often concerned with Yugoslavia’s unacknowledged role in the Holocaust. In “Doppelgänger,” an old man attempts to return his family’s silver to the original Jewish owners. “Her books are contraptions intended to produce a series of psychological and somatic responses in her readers,” our critic Parul Sehgal writes. “In short: panic, pity, shame, nausea, exhilaration — and then, the bewildering desire to experience these very emotions again.”
THE PEANUTS PAPERS: Writers and Cartoonists on Charlie Brown, Snoopy & the Gang, and the Meaning of Life, edited by Andrew Blauner. (The Library of America, $24.95.) This collection of essays by Chris Ware, Jonathan Franzen, Ann Patchett and other admirers of Charles M. Schulz’s quintessentially American comic strip will help you see “Peanuts” clear, if you don’t already, as a psychologically complex epic about stoicism, faith and other approaches to existential struggles. It’s a “charming, searching book,” our reviewer John Williams writes.
GENIUS & ANXIETY: How Jews Changed the World, 1847-1947, by Norman Lebrecht. (Scribner, $30.) Lebrecht recounts a century of Jewish achievement, describing not only usual suspects like Marx, Freud and Einstein, but also lesser-known figures like Karl Landstein, the father of blood types, and the shipping magnate Albert Ballin. “The book features dozens of remarkable scientists, artists and politicians of Jewish descent,” Clémence Boulouque writes, reviewing it. “Some of Lebrecht’s transitions from one vignette to the next flow particularly well.”
THE CONFOUNDING ISLAND: Jamaica and the Postcolonial Predicament, by Orlando Patterson. (Belknap/Harvard University, $35.) For a tiny island in the Caribbean, Jamaica enjoys global reach, but as Patterson shows, along with Jamaica’s triumphs in culture and sports, there are the darker shadows of poverty and crime. “Patterson carefully explores the complexity of the structural machinery behind Jamaica’s dazzling successes and dismal failures, rather than just chalking these up to simple causes,” Carrie Gibson writes in her review. “Although at times Patterson is critical of and disappointed by his fellow Jamaicans, his admiration for the nation’s independent spirit shines through.”
THE DEPOSITIONS: New and Selected Essays on Being and Ceasing to Be, by Thomas Lynch. (Norton, $27.95.) Who is more qualified to write about the end of life than a poet who is also a funeral director? For decades Lynch has thought deeply about death and its rituals in his twin careers as writer and undertaker; no subject is off limits in this elegant, respectful and refreshingly funny discussion of a subject that often goes unexplored. “Some of his finest, wryest and most stylish essays about the human enterprise of mortality appear together in this collection,” Scott Simon writes in his review. “You will be grateful for these graceful essays, which light up so many of the dark details that are part of what is, after all, the one demographic to which we will all belong.”
ONE LONG RIVER OF SONG: Notes on Wonder, by Brian Doyle. (Little, Brown, $26.) Doyle died in 2017 at the age of 60. In this posthumous essay collection, readers will find meditations on both the natural and human worlds as well as frequent discussions of the author’s Catholic faith. The overall effect is a balm that makes for ideal reading at the dawn of the new year. Our reviewer, Margaret Renkl, calls it a “remarkable book” filled with astonishing language and capacity for celebration: “God’s acolyte is Doyle himself, missing not a single gorgeous blessing in a life so full of love it spilled over into essay after essay after essay.”
FEED, by Tommy Pico. (Tin House, paper, $15.95.) The title of Pico’s restless, intimate and exhilarating new volume of poetry, his fourth, covers varieties of appetite: for sex, for nutrition, for fame, for news, for gossip, for simple companionship. “Feed” lets sympathetic readers pretend to live, for almost 80 pages, inside Pico’s charismatic, uneasy mind. “What sets him apart?” Stephanie Burt writes in her review. “For one thing — as with all genuine poets — his style: Pico is always breaking off, beginning again, weaving rhymes into prose with few other patterns. This agitated irregularity lets Pico portray hungers both spiritual and physical, along with his attempts to remedy them.”
TINY LOVE: The Complete Stories of Larry Brown. (Algonquin, paper, $18.95.) Blunt, brilliant tales of hardscrabble lives, as captured by the Mississippi writer who died in 2004, at the age of 53. Brown fully and generously inhabited the world of his gritty characters and their obvious flaws. “His stories bring to mind John Steinbeck’s forgiving depictions of scamps and scoundrels,” Daniel Woodrell writes in his review, and “show great regard for sad-sack charmers stumbling along the sun-bleached road to wherever.”