How and Why Our Editorial Board Endorses Political Candidates
In an effort to shed more light on how we work, The Times is running a series of short posts explaining some of our journalistic practices. Read more from this series here.
How should you vote? It’s perhaps the most important civic decision you can make in an election year.
Newspaper endorsements can help educate voters on national and local candidates and lead to better-informed decisions at the ballot box.
But the endorsement process is typically opaque: The opinion section publishes an unsigned editorial that supports one candidate and makes a case for why readers should do the same. Who are the people behind that decision, and how do they come to it?
Here, Kathleen Kingsbury, The Times’s deputy editorial page editor, explains our Opinion section’s endorsement process and how she’s making it more transparent.
Why does The Times’s editorial board endorse political candidates? Why not just have the columnists make individual endorsements?
Endorsements are supposed to assess candidates’ platforms and pledges and offer readers in-depth guidance so they can make up their minds on whom to vote for in an educated way. In the endorsement interviews, the editorial board asks the contenders tough questions that most readers don’t have an opportunity to ask them.
Over the past 160 years, the impact that newspaper endorsements have had on elections hasn’t been entirely clear — or consistent. Early on in the history of endorsements, newspapers had reason to question their impact: In 1897, nearly all New York newspapers backed losing candidates in the year’s elections, and the trade journal The Journalist wrote, “What a hollow sham the boasted power of the press is.” Then, in nearly all presidential elections from 1940 to 2016, the candidate with the most newspaper endorsements won.
But The Chicago Tribune’s editorial page editor, John McCormick, argued in The Columbia Journalism Review in January 2017 that voter impact was only one piece of the editorial endorsement puzzle. “Swaying votes is only one reason for endorsing, and arguably not the most important,” Mr. McCormick wrote. “Every few years, endorsements bring a publication to full stop. They explain to the world what that publication is, what it advocates, how it thinks, what principles it holds dear.”
Times columnists are not members of the editorial board, though some of them do endorse candidates separately.
What are the main criteria used to evaluate candidates?
The closest analogy to this process may be a job interview. What is it in the candidates’ experience that prepares them for the job we’re trying to fill?
We have all read their résumés and watched their debate performances; their platforms and programs are on their websites. We’re trying to get at something different — how they would perform in office and whether they have any idea of how to accomplish whatever goals they’ve set.
What is their diagnosis of what ails America, and how are they going to fix it? Whose platform and record are most consistent with our values? Whose temperament and character are best suited to the demands of the presidency? Who can be the most effective president in today’s polarized political climate?
Who participates in the decision-making process? How do you prepare?
As we describe here, the editorial board is a group of more than a dozen veteran journalists. Each member brings years of research, subject-matter expertise and personal experience to the job. Some, like me, are former foreign correspondents or beat reporters; one member is a lapsed scientist; another is a lawyer by training. For many, politics is in their blood, and this is the fourth, fifth or sixth election they’ve covered.
Though we each bring a different perspective to these interviews, all of us have done our homework, down to talking to voters at Iowa fish fries and spending hours combing through candidates’ records and policy papers. We’ve also invited a few other writers and editors from our Opinion pages to join the interviews to add to the board’s expertise in specific areas.
The Times’s editorial page editor, James Bennet, whose brother, Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, is running for the Democratic nomination, has recused himself from any involvement in the 2020 elections.
How does the editorial board come to endorsement decisions?
After we’ve interviewed every candidate, we get together and deliberate. We discuss the merits of each candidate, what we heard from them in the interviews, what challenges they face to earn the nomination and to win a general election. Our choice will reflect a consensus of the board.
Not everyone will agree with our endorsement or the thinking behind it. But our goal is to present an informed view through reasoned analysis, open debate and what Adolph S. Ochs, who bought The Times in 1896, once called “the free exercise of a sound conscience.”
Do the editorial board’s endorsements ever influence The Times’s coverage of the candidates?
No. The Times’s Opinion section is completely separate from its newsroom.
What is new this year about the editorial board’s process for endorsing a presidential primary candidate?
The board comes to its decision by doing something very few people in America get a chance to do: sitting down privately with each of the candidates, away from press secretaries and chiefs of staff, for over an hour and asking them any questions we want. Historically, these intense interviews have been off the record, meaning nothing that’s said leaves the room or ends up in our writing, other than the final judgment made by the board.
This year, the goal is to make our primary endorsement process the most transparent to date. In a first for The Times, all interviews have been on the record and filmed. We will publish full, annotated transcripts online over the next several weeks. Portions of the interviews and the board’s deliberations will be broadcast on “The Weekly” on FX and Hulu on Sunday night. We’ll also take you behind the scenes in a pop-up podcast.

Why did you decide to change the process? What do you hope readers learn from the new approach?
The 2020 election is beginning in the shadow of voter suppression, election hacking, disinformation campaigns and a presidential impeachment.
The endorsement process is an opportunity to ask hard questions and engage candidates in the kind of prolonged back-and-forth that reveals insights readers aren’t always privy to but have a right to know about. So rather than continue to keep these illuminating interviews under wraps, we’ve decided to experiment with a new level of openness.
In September 2016, the editorial board made an exception and wrote an anti-endorsement for Donald J. Trump, then the Republican nominee for president. Do you anticipate future anti-endorsements?
I mean, anything is possible.