Ouch, Oh and Oh No!
To the Editor:
I’d like to amend the caption for the illustration of medieval tooth extraction that accompanied Josephine Livingstone’s review of Jack Hartnell’s “Medieval Bodies: Life and Death in the Middle Ages” and Sylvia Townsend Warner’s “The Corner That Held Them” (Jan. 5). The image, taken from the 14th-century London encyclopedia “Omne Bonum,” shows a dental instrument on a belt or snakeskin with sewn-in teeth. Such devices were used by itinerant “dentists” rather like a modern “pair of pliers,” often at country fairs. Ouch.
Richard Schmidt
Washington
To the Editor:
Martin Plimmer’s essay “In Roald Dahl’s Car” (Jan. 12) reminded me of my days on a rival newspaper, The Bucks Advertiser, when I was sent on similar assignments after the last bus left and had to walk or hitchhike the same scary terrain.
Alas, I didn’t encounter the likes of Roald Dahl. The locals were still obsessed with the Great Train Robbery. Like Plimmer and countless other youthful reporters, we were assigned the birth, marriage and death columns before we could rise to features. All a necessary grounding before Fleet Street.
Pamela Ellen Ferguson
Austin, Tex.
To the Editor:
In her insightful review of Gillian Gill’s “Virginia Woolf: And the Women Who Shaped Her World” (Jan. 12), Claire Jarvis refers to the “incestuous advances” Woolf suffered at the hands of her half brothers. George Duckworth’s actions were not “advances.” They were repeated, physical, full-on sexual abuse. After their parents married, Duckworth, who was 14 years older than his half sister and then in his 20s, repeatedly entered her bedroom secretly at night and sexually abused her until her older sister, Vanessa, also his victim, reported her own abuse to a family doctor.
Depictions of sexual abuse have historically been softened with words like “advances,” “fondling” and “groping,” when in fact we are talking about physical coercion, digital penetration, rape and other traumatic invasions of the bodies of the vulnerable, voiceless and less powerful. This minimizing language dampens our outrage and helps us allow it to continue. Just as torture is more than “enhanced interrogation,” sexual abuse by an older sibling is more than an “incestuous advance.”
Katy Butler
Mill Valley, Calif.
The writer is the author of “Knocking on Heaven’s Door” and “The Art of Dying Well.”
To the Editor:
Leanne Shapton’s delightful graphic sketchbook “The Colors of Ghosts” (Dec. 29) evoked fond memories of Jacques Duquennoy’s “Le Dîner Fantôme,” in which a boy invites a few ghosts to dinner and watches in wonder as they change color with the courses: orange with the pumpkin soup, green with the salad and so on. My children found it endlessly amusing, perhaps recognizing early on how diversity can make things more fun.
James A. Geraghty
Boston
