Carnegie Hall’s New Season: Here’s What We Want to Hear
The classical music world has been changing, and some of those shifts will be felt at Carnegie Hall.
Carnegie announced Tuesday that next season would feature the Berlin Philharmonic’s first concerts at the hall under its new chief conductor, Kirill Petrenko; the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra’s first with its music director, Mirga Grazinyte-Tyla; and the Carnegie debut of Teodor Currentzis and the orchestra he founded, MusicAeterna.
“With the orchestras, there are a huge number of firsts,” Clive Gillinson, the hall’s executive and artistic director, said in an interview.
Rhiannon Giddens, the singer, songwriter, banjo player and musical polymath, will be featured in a Perspectives series in which she will trace the connections between popular and classical songs, team up with other banjo players to explore the experience of African-American women and delve into the complicated history of minstrelsy.
Jordi Savall, the early-music specialist and viola da gamba virtuoso, and Yannick Nézet-Séguin, the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra and the Metropolitan Opera, will also be featured in series. A festival called “Voices of Hope: Artists in Times of Oppression” will explore musical responses to injustice, and Andrew Norman will hold the Richard and Barbara Debs Composer’s Chair.
Among dozens of offerings, what to hear? This is the best of the best: the performances we at The New York Times are most looking forward to.
There are three opportunities to hear Gustavo Dudamel conduct the West Coast’s leading ensemble at Carnegie this fall, in the orchestra’s first hall appearance in 30 years. The season-opening gala on Oct. 7 features a brief John Adams fanfare, Grieg (Lang Lang playing the Piano Concerto) and more Grieg (selections from “Peer Gynt”); Oct. 9 brings Mahler’s Sixth Symphony. But in between is the most promising program, with two New York premieres: a curtain-raiser by the young composer Gabriella Smith and Andrew Norman’s Violin Concerto (with the always-fascinating Leila Josefowicz), with the gentle chaser of Ginastera’s “Estancia.” JOSHUA BARONE
Conducting sensation Mirga Grazinyte-Tyla and her orchestra, which is celebrating its centenary this year, give two concerts that perfectly showcase their tastes and flair for programming. One adeptly balances the familiar with the new and unusual, with Ravel’s “La Valse” and Debussy’s “La Mer” framing Mieczyslaw Weinberg’s Violin Concerto and Thomas Adès’s “Angel Symphony,” which they will premiere this spring. The other focuses on British music, with Tippett’s oratorio “A Child of Our Time” following Sheku Kanneh-Mason as the soloist in Elgar’s Cello Concerto. DAVID ALLEN
One of the great stories in classical music over the past decade has been how the Greek-born, Russian-trained conductor Teodor Currentzis formed his own idiosyncratic orchestra in Siberia, garnering a Sony recording contract and triumphing around the world. Their American debut last year at the Shed was one of the major events of the cultural year, and now Currentzis and the orchestra will bring their blistering intensity to Carnegie, with Tchaikovsky’s “Pathétique” Symphony and the Adagio from Mahler’s Symphony No. 10. MICHAEL COOPER
As part of Andrew Norman’s composing residency, this ensemble presents the New York premiere of “Begin,” a chamber-orchestra piece first heard in Los Angeles last year. The rest of the program is just as tantalizing, with world premieres by Ellen Reid, Jane Meenaghan and George Lewis. SETH COLTER WALLS
Four days after Mr. Savall leads his period-instrument orchestra Le Concert des Nations and vocal ensemble La Capella Reial de Catalunya in Monteverdi’s glorious Vespers in Carnegie’s main auditorium, he’ll bring those groups downstairs, to the more intimate Zankel Hall, for Monteverdi’s complete “Madrigals of War and Love,” a rare chance to hear a collection of genre-blurring pieces that altered music history. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
In the wake of feverish hype in the opera world, the Norwegian soprano Lise Davidsen made her Metropolitan Opera debut this fall in Tchaikovsky’s “The Queen of Spades” and, if anything, surpassed the high expectations. Her silvery voice had both thrilling power and nuanced expressivity. It will be fascinating to hear her in a recital setting; with the pianist James Baillieu, she sings works by Grieg, Mahler, Berg (“Seven Early Songs”) and Wagner (“Wesendonck Lieder”). ANTHONY TOMMASINI
When I went to Berlin last year for Kirill Petrenko’s debut concerts as the Philharmonic’s chief conductor, I was struck by the excitement he generated among its players. Now New Yorkers will be able to judge for themselves. This program, featuring the great dramatic soprano Nina Stemme singing Brünnhilde’s Immolation Scene from Wagner’s “Götterdämmerung,” gives him a chance to show off his operatic chops, which he honed during a memorable run at the Bavarian State Opera in Munich. (In a rarity for Carnegie, this program is played twice, on Nov. 18 and 20; on the 19th, the Philharmonic performs Webern, Mendelssohn and Brahms.) MICHAEL COOPER
The Carnegie lineup is full of superb voices, violinists, pianists — the meat and potatoes of classical music. So less conventional instruments pop out, like the accordion played by this Latvian virtuoso. “Revelatory,” according to my colleague James R. Oestreich, Ms. Sidorova will perform arrangements of Bach, Mozart and Tchaikovsky alongside works tailor-made for accordion by Sofia Gubaidulina, Alfred Schnittke and others. ZACHARY WOOLFE
Go ahead and call the Louisville Orchestra a “regional” (as opposed to “major”) ensemble. That’s a meaningless distinction for the many people excited by the adventurous programs the dynamic young conductor Teddy Abrams and his excellent players have been giving. For example, the concert they will present at Carnegie will offer Andrew Norman’s “Sacred Geometry,” Copland’s “Appalachian Spring” (with dancers from Louisville Ballet) and Jim James’s song cycle “The Order of Life,” performed with its composer, a Louisville native and the leader of the rock band My Morning Jacket. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
For all my worries about the direction that the Boston Symphony has taken under its music director, Andris Nelsons, there have been two pluses during his tenure so far: his Shostakovich survey (steadily being released on record to considerable acclaim) and his opera. A Shostakovich opera, then, ought to come off well, especially this composer’s best, “Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk.” The soprano Kristine Opolais is scheduled as Katerina, with Brandon Jovanovich as Sergey. DAVID ALLEN
The tenor Mark Padmore once told me he was reminded of all the words for “rehearsal” when working with the pianist Mitsuko Uchida: “In French, ‘répétition,’ which speaks for itself; in German, ‘probe’ — proving or trying. In English, it has nothing to do with hearing. Its etymology is to till the earth in preparation for seed. Working with Mitsuko, all three of those things, those attitudes to rehearsing, are absolutely present.” Now imagine how they’ll sound in “Dichterliebe” and other Schumann works. JOSHUA BARONE
This is, as always, a good season for piano recitals at Carnegie, with Vikingur Olafsson, Daniil Trifonov, Igor Levit and Jean-Yves Thibaudet all making solo appearances worthy of anticipation. But Mr. Tharaud’s program is particularly intriguing. It bridges the gap between the French Baroque — Couperin, Rameau and the more obscure composers Jean-Henri d’Anglebert and Joseph-Nicolas-Pancrace Royer — and the French early 20th century, with works by Ravel and Reynaldo Hahn that will benefit from this artist’s sensual grace. ZACHARY WOOLFE
It’s been many years since the great mezzo-soprano Waltraud Meier last sang at Carnegie, which makes her return with this superb ensemble — freed from its Lincoln Center pit after the opera season ends — a true event. Wagner’s lush “Wesendonck Lieder” is on the agenda, conducted by Semyon Bychkov, who fills out the evening leading Shostakovich’s “Leningrad” Symphony. ZACHARY WOOLFE