11 Plays and Musicals to Go to in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to plays and musicals coming to New York stages and a few last-chance picks of shows that are about to close. Our reviews of open shows are at nytimes.com/reviews/theater.
‘ALL THE NATALIE PORTMANS’ at the Robert W. Wilson MCC Theater Space (previews start on Feb. 6; opens on Feb. 24). May the Padmé Amidala be with you. In C.A. Johnson’s magical realist play, a young queer woman, Keyonna, leads an active fantasy life with her muse, Natalie Portman. Then reality impinges. Kate Whoriskey directs; Kara Young stars as Keyonna, with Joshua Boone as her brother Samuel and Elise Kibler as Natalie.
212-727-7722, mcctheater.org
‘ANATOMY OF A SUICIDE’ at the Atlantic Theater Company at the Linda Gross Theater (previews start on Feb. 1; opens on Feb. 18). Alice Birch (“Revolt. She Said. Revolt Again.”) wants to know if trauma can be inherited. In this triptych, which won the Susan Smith Blackburn Prize, she organizes a grandmother, a mother and a daughter in conjoined stories across seven decades or so. Lileana Blain-Cruz directs a cast that includes Carla Gugino, Celeste Arias and Gabby Beans.
866-811-4111, atlantictheater.org
‘BLUES FOR AN ALABAMA SKY’ at Theater Row (previews start on Feb. 4; opens on Feb. 18). The Keen Company presents the long-delayed New York premiere of Pearl Cleage’s ensemble drama, set among a group of artists in the waning days of the Harlem Renaissance. Alfie Fuller stars, as the lounge singer Angel, alongside Jasminn Johnson, John-Andrew Morrison, Khiry Walker and Sheldon Woodley. LA Williams directs.
212-239-6200, keencompany.org
‘BOB & CAROL & TED & ALICE’ at the Pershing Square Signature Center (in previews; opens on Feb. 4). What the world needs now is love, sweet love, and also a musical adaptation of the 1969 Paul Mazursky film. For the New Group, Scott Elliott directs Jonathan Marc Sherman’s book about the sexual revolution and its noncombatants. The cast includes Jennifer Damiano, Ana Nogueira, Joél Pérez, Michael Zegen and Suzanne Vega, with music and lyrics by Duncan Sheik.
917-935-4242, thenewgroup.org
‘CAMBODIAN ROCK BAND’ at the Pershing Square Signature Center (previews start on Feb. 4; opens on Feb. 24). A rock show, a family tragedy and a historical mystery, Lauren Yee’s prizewinning play finds a California father and daughter meeting again in Cambodia, reinvestigating the crimes of the Khmer Rouge. Chay Yew directs a cast that includes Francis Jue, Joe Ngo and Courtney Reed. With music by the real-life Cambodian-American rock band Dengue Fever.
212-244-7529, signaturetheatre.org
‘GIRL FROM THE NORTH COUNTRY’ at the Belasco Theater (previews start on Feb. 7; opens on March 5). This Bob Dylan jukebox musical, written and directed by Conor McPherson, now knocks on Broadway’s door. Set in a boardinghouse in Duluth, Minn., in 1934, it centers on various down-at-heart, down-at-heel residents. Ben Brantley wrote, “What’s created, through songs written by Mr. Dylan over half a century, is a climate of feeling, as pervasive and evasive as fog.”
212-239-6200, northcountryonbroadway.com
‘HAMLET’ at St. Ann’s Warehouse (previews start on Feb. 1; opens on Feb. 10). Hamlet’s inky cloak? Ruth Negga is wearing it now. The Ethiopian-Irish actress plays the prince in Yaël Farber’s production of Shakespeare’s tragedy. “It nearly killed me,” she told The New York Times, describing an earlier run. Guess there’s nothing like a Dane. With Aoife Duffin as Ophelia.
718-254-8779, stannswarehouse.org
‘STEW’ at Walkerspace (in previews; opens on Feb. 1). Page 73 cooks up another debut. In this tragedy from Zora Howard, a Harlem-based playwright, three generations of African-American women meet for a home-cooked meal and a painful revelation. Colette Robert directs a cast that includes Portia, Kristin Dodson, Toni Lachelle Pollitt and Nikkole Salter.
page73.org
‘WE’RE GONNA DIE’ at the Tony Kiser Theater at Second Stage Theater (previews start on Feb. 4; opens on Feb. 25). Young Jean Lee’s autobiographical rock almost-musical, written as part of her work with the playwrights’ collective 13P, has a new lease on life. Backed by a five-piece band, Janelle McDermoth discourses on life, death and the arguable usefulness of art. Raja Feather Kelly directs.
212-541-4516, 2st.com
THE BIG APPLE CIRCUS at Damrosch Park (closes on Feb. 2). This popular local circus folds its big tent. The current iteration is sometimes racier than usual, but who can’t help enjoying the Lopez Troupe riding bicycles on a high wire or Jayson Dominguez surviving the Wheel of Death? The real stars: the magnificent Savitsky Cats, balls of fluff with acrobatic chops.
212-257-2330, bigapplecircus.com
‘TIMON OF ATHENS’ at the Polonsky Shakespeare Center (closes on Feb. 9). Fashioned for this age of inequality, Simon Godwin’s adaptation of Shakespeare’s (and Thomas Middleton’s) vexed semitragedy ends its run. Starring Kathryn Hunter as a plutocrat who goes broke, the production adds in fragments from other Shakespeare plays, plus a sonnet. Jesse Green called it an “energetic and somewhat Frankensteined revival.”
866-811-4111, tfana.org