Taking Measure of #MeToo
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
Harvey Weinstein’s trial for rape and predatory sexual assault began in New York this week. It is an anticipated legal reckoning for the disgraced Hollywood producer since Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey, investigative reporters at The Times, first reported sexual misconduct allegations against Mr. Weinstein more than two years ago. Last month, Ms. Kantor and Ms. Twohey held two group phone discussions with subscribers about their book, “She Said,” a detailed account of their Pulitzer Prize-winning work on the accusations against Mr. Weinstein. The book also covers the sexual assault allegations against Brett M. Kavanaugh, then a Supreme Court nominee, by Christine Blasey Ford in 2018. Below are selected exchanges, condensed for space, with callers and The Times reporter Laura M. Holson, who moderated the sessions.
In cases of sexual abuse and harassment, can anyone ever be fully compensated?
JODI KANTOR It’s a question we’ve been thinking a lot about. Less in terms of compensation, but I think more about what accountability looks like. Part of what’s dramatic about all the talking at this moment is that the criminal trial is supposed to be the ultimate in accountability.  Are we actually going to get clarity from this trial?
Do you think the system of people signing nondisclosure agreements can change?
KANTOR There’s been some change at the state level. It’s tricky because some victims really do want privacy, and also there are some powerful forces who want these nondisclosure agreements to stay in place. I wouldn’t say we’ve really reckoned as a society with the question of, What have these secret settlements done collectively? Not only have they not solved the problem of sexual harassment or abuse, they may have enabled it.
You make an interesting point about privacy vs. secrecy. Can you talk a little about that? I’m thinking of Christine Blasey Ford.
MEGAN TWOHEY About two months after the Senate hearings, I flew to California and obtained the first interview with her after the hearing. She showed up with a baseball hat pulled down over her eyes. She was still living in hiding because of the death threats. This really was a private citizen trying to share some information with the people making this really important job decision. There were so many other forces that came to bear down on her and ultimately left her in this place that I don’t think she could have even imagined.
Do you think there’s been durability in the #MeToo movement?
TWOHEY Absolutely. Jodi and I returned from our book leave this past summer and within weeks the Jeffrey Epstein story had broken. It was a reminder that even if there are attempts to turn away from this issue, the issue comes back and finds all of us. There’s still a broader reckoning that we have to have among ourselves.
How do you two work together? You didn’t really know each other well before.   
KANTOR We didn’t. Very early on we just had an ability to trust each other. Part of what you’re doing when you’re reporting a story like this is that you’re trying to be strong for everybody else. You want to be strong for your sources. You want to be strong in dealing with Harvey Weinstein. The partnership is a place to gather strength, but also to be a little vulnerable. We can really talk to each other in a very honest way.
Can you share some of the techniques you used to get reluctant people to talk?
KANTOR You do it by being slow and patient. We went to see people in person whenever possible. We had repeated conversations; we tried to make it clear to the victims that we weren’t just using them. A reporter-source relationship is not a friendship. We tried to be transparent. And we could sometimes have answers for people. People would say, “Well what if nobody believes me?” We could say: “Well, at The Times, we corroborate these stories. We look for other forms of evidence.”