A Rare Good First Week at a Grand Slam for the American Men
MELBOURNE, Australia — Bidding farewell to the least impressive decade in its history, American men’s tennis is suddenly flipping its script down under.
Five American men reached the third round of the Australian Open, the most of any country; in the previous 10 years, that number was never more than two.
“It’s a good sign,” said John Isner, who has led American men’s tennis since the retirement of Andy Roddick, who was the last American man to win a Grand Slam singles title at the 2003 United States Open.
The surge is particularly surprising after American male tennis players turned in a horrible first week of the season. The United States team lost all three ties it played in the ATP Cup, including a shocking defeat to lowly Norway, which had only one player ranked in the top 300. The two American players who played that week in the ATP tournament in Doha both lost in the first round.
“To say the least: very uninspiring,” Isner said. “I wouldn’t say I saw this coming.”
The strength in numbers has included seeded players No. 19 Isner and No. 29 Taylor Fritz, and the veteran Sam Querrey, but also considerable surprises. American men achieved the two biggest upsets of the tournament so far on Wednesday evening, with 100th-ranked Tennys Sandgren defeating eighth-seeded Matteo Berrettini and 80th-ranked Tommy Paul beating 18th-seeded Grigor Dimitrov, both in five sets.
Both took similarly scenic routes to victory. Sandgren had a two-set lead over Berrettini before the Italian surged, but clung on for a 7-6(7), 6-4, 4-6, 2-6, 7-5 victory. Paul, playing in an adjacent arena, had also led by two sets to none but was down a break in the fifth set to Dimitrov when he saw on a scoreboard that Sandgren had eked out a victory.
“I looked up and I literally saw that Sandgren won his first two sets and lost the next two and then won,” Paul said. “And I was like, ‘All right, I guess it can be done.’”
Paul broke Dimitrov in the 10th game of the fifth set, and ultimately won 6-4, 7-6(6), 3-6, 6-7(3), 7-6(10-3).
Paul, 22, was a highly-touted junior in his youth, winning the 2015 French Open boys’ title. He turned professional later that year, signed as a prized prospect by Roger Federer’s Team 8 agency, but struggled to harness the single-mindedness required of a touring professional.
“It was more where my head was at,” Paul said. “I wasn’t prepared to travel the world and play pro tournaments and play against guys that devoted their life to it.”
Paul, who had never won a main draw match at a Grand Slam event before this week, was not re-signed by the agency when his contract lapsed in 2018.
“I’m more accepting that this is my job, and I’ve got to do everything I can to succeed,” he said. “First year as a pro, second year as a pro, I’d see all my friends having so much fun in college and wish I was there. That’s kind of the biggest thing now: all my friends are out of school, in jobs, and now what I’m doing isn’t too bad.”
As he tried to replicate a collegiate lifestyle at tournaments, Paul’s sophomoric conduct earned the ire of the U.S. Tennis Association, which passed him up for a wild card at last year’s United States Open in favor of several players ranked below him. The snub proved to be a turning point for him.
“I felt like I should have been in the main, and I just came into the tournament with a lot of anger, really,” Paul said of the U.S. Open. “I guess you could call it a wake-up call, but I was just heated.”
With the guidance of coach Brad Stine, Paul has channeled that heat into a hot streak, winning 19 of 22 matches since New York to break into the top 100 for the first time, years after his junior peers Taylor Fritz and Frances Tiafoe.
“It’s been a long time coming,” Paul said. “I’ve watched my friends do well for a long time, and I hope I continue to see them do well. I don’t think there’s any reason I can’t be winning matches, too.”
Sandgren, who unlike Paul stayed under the radar by playing college tennis, said Paul deserved patience as he developed. “When you’re young you sometimes don’t make the most optimal decisions; everybody’s guilty of that to some degree,” Sandgren said. “The more disciplined you can be, your odds are better.”
Sandgren has been more disciplined, but has streaky results. For a player of his low profile, never reaching the Top 40 in the ATP rankings, Sandgren has amassed a remarkable collection of big wins at Grand Slam events, including a run to the quarterfinals here in 2018. His win over Berrettini was his fourth victory against a top-10 opponent at a Grand Slam in six matches, a winning percentage few others could touch. Calling himself a “realist with a pessimistic bent,” however, Sandgren sought ways to play down his win over Berrettini.
“I’m thinking, ‘Well, it’s early in the year, and I don’t think he’d played an event,’” Sandgren said. “So that’s in the back of my head, that he’s not match tough. I’m searching for my own asterisks so I can pin myself down a little.”
Sandgren was particularly proud of his physicality against Berrettini, never flagging in the five-set match. After a toe injury last fall, Sandgren spent his off-season in the gym, improving his stamina and adding the muscle he said he needed to justify being the only man other than Rafael Nadal to wear sleeveless shirts here.
“Well, I’ve been working out — I think I can pull this off,” Sandgren said.
Reinventing his image among tennis fans may prove even harder work. During his 2018 run here, Sandgren drew scrutiny and criticism for his social media posts, in which he engaged with several far-right political figures and theories. After he was eliminated, he opened his news conference with a statement railing against the news media for “demonizing” him.
Sandgren said he now followed politics “less passionately.”
“I’m relatively good at one thing, which is playing tennis,” Sandgren said. “I wouldn’t want another interest I have, or a hobby — and following politics is a hobby — to bring that side of me down.”
Sandgren expressed frustration, however, that some tennis fans still held his past posts against him.
“How much time is enough time?” he asked. “Is it 10 years? Is it two decades? I have no answer to that question. But I don’t take it seriously, because it has nothing to do with anything that I’m doing.”