N.H.L. Takeaways at the Season’s Midpoint
As December came to a close, the N.H.L. season hit its midpoint. For some teams, things reached a breaking point: Three more head coaches were fired in the past month. For others, December was a high point: The Pittsburgh Penguins, the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Tampa Bay Lightning were among the teams who had their best month of the season. Consistently productive performers and breakout talents alike shined as the calendar year came to an end, and the sport’s future was on display at the International Ice Hockey Federation’s world junior championships.
The St. Louis Blues have had an unusually seamless start to a title defense, coasting atop the Western Conference for much of the season and putting together the West’s best record in December, 9-4-0. They did so without their top goal-scorer, Vladimir Tarasenko, who sustained a shoulder injury during an Oct. 24 victory over the Los Angeles Kings. He is not expected to return until the final month of the season.
Three veterans 28 or older have filled the offensive void left by Tarasenko. The versatile forward David Perron has delivered nearly a point per game. Defenseman Alex Pietrangelo, the team’s captain, had 31 points through 41 games, and center Brayden Schenn had already equaled his goal output from last season with 17. All three players are on a pace for career highs in goals and points.
But December’s most impressive performer was the Pittsburgh Penguins. They have consistently made an unenviable top-five list this season, for man games lost, but have managed to stay in the playoff picture, excel at home and post a league-best 10-2-0 record in December. Entering Thursday’s games, they led the N.H.L. in home victories with 16. They have begun shifting to a new starting goalie — the nearly impenetrable Tristan Jarry, 24,  gradually nudging aside the incumbent, Matt Murray —  and the time in which their roster has been entirely healthy this season can be measured in periods, two, rather than games.
Their absentees have included centers Evgeni Malkin, who has missed 13 games to injury and illness, and Sidney Crosby, who as of the end of the month had missed 22 and counting after an operation on a core muscle. Pittsburgh’s leading scorer, left wing Jake Guentzel, was one of just six Penguins who had played in every game this season, but he sustained a right shoulder injury in a Monday game against Ottawa that is expected to sideline him for four to six months.
Two of the best individual performances of December came from players whose teams have hemorrhaged talent recently.
Among goalies, the Columbus Blue Jackets’ Joonas Korpisalo had the most starts in December, the second-best save percentage and the second-best goals-against average among starters in December. Jarry had a lower goals-against average and save percentage, but Korpisalo faced 72 more shots.
He also received less support: The Penguins had the N.H.L.’s fifth highest-scoring offense in December, while Columbus ranked 23rd in goals per game. The Blue Jackets lost their leading scorer, starting goalie and four trade-deadline pickups, including Matt Duchene, in the off-season. Now, they have lost Korpisalo for four to six weeks; he was injured on Sunday in the shootout portion of a loss to Chicago, and on Monday he had surgery to repair a torn meniscus.
Ottawa Senators wing Anthony Duclair, 24, has played for five franchises in his career. His 11 goals in 13 December games gave him the league’s highest total for the month and propelled him to an All-Star selection, the first of his career. The Senators do not resemble the team that made the 2017 Eastern Conference finals, having undergone a youth movement that included the acquisition of Duclair.
The toll of dismissed head coaches this season is now five. After November brought the firing of Toronto Coach Mike Babcock and the resignation of Calgary’s Bill Peters — following allegations of physical abuse and the use of racial slurs earlier in his career — both teams have fared well.
In the first week of December, the Devils fired Coach John Hynes amid a disastrous start to a season in which the bulk of the roster underperformed. General Manager Ray Shero made the decision after a 7-1 loss to Buffalo that he said he did not “even know how to describe.” Buffalo had also beaten the Devils, 7-2, earlier in the season for a 14-3 aggregate score that seemed more appropriate for the N.F.L.
The Devils had four times blown multiple-goal leads on home ice. Of their key veteran acquisitions, P.K. Subban has been on a pace for a career-worst season (eight points in 39 games to date) and Wayne Simmonds (14 in 39) has had his least productive campaign since he began getting regular power-play shifts in 2011. Alain Nasreddine was promoted to interim head coach, and the team was 5-6-2 in December.
A week later, the Dallas Stars fired Jim Montgomery, citing “unprofessional conduct” in a move that stunned not only fans and reporters, but also the Dallas players. The Stars have refused to disclose the specific reasons for the decision. Rick Bowness took over, and Dallas has gone 6-3-1 under his stewardship.
The next day, the San Jose Sharks fired their head coach, Peter DeBoer, along with the assistants Steve Spott, Dave Barr and Johan Hedberg. Hedberg was the goalie coach, and the Sharks have struggled mightily in net for much of the past two seasons, despite reaching the Western Conference finals last spring. Bob Boughner, a remaining assistant, was promoted to interim head coach. So far the move has not yielded the about-face the Sharks hoped for: Heading into Thursday’s games, they had posted a 2-5-1 record under Boughner and remained near the bottom of the league’s weakest division.
In a rematch of last year’s championship game, Finland defeated the United States, 1-0, in the quarterfinals of the world junior championships on Thursday.
The lone goal on Thursday was scored by Joonas Oden, the son of a Finnish mother and an American father. Oden, who was born and raised in the United States before moving to Finland at age 12, is eligible for this year’s N.H.L. draft.
This will be the first time the United States, which fell to Finland by 3-2 in last year’s final, has failed to medal since 2015. The American center Trevor Zegras, an Anaheim Ducks prospect, led his team with nine points, all of them from assists.
The junior championships, an annual competition that showcases the best players under 20 who are not competing regularly in the N.H.L., will conclude on Sunday. Finland, which won the tournament in three of the past six years, will meet Canada on Saturday in one semifinal, and Sweden will face Russia in the other.
Canadian wing Alexis Lafrenière, the likely top selection in this year’s draft, returned for Thursday’s 6-1 trampling of Slovakia after a two-game absence due to a knee injury sustained in the group stage. Center Barrett Hayton, who has played 14 games for the Arizona Coyotes this season, had three points in the win and leads Canada with nine points over all.
Sweden, which has allowed a tournament-low eight goals, dominated the host country, the Czech Republic, 5-0, in the quarterfinals, while Russia defeated Switzerland, 3-1.
The Swedes have two of the tournament’s top offensive weapons: Wing Samuel Fagemo, a Los Angeles Kings prospect, leads in goals with six, and wing Nils Hoglander, a Vancouver Canucks draft pick, leads in overall scoring with 10 points.