Fort Worth Embraces Its Cowboy Culture
FORT WORTH — Throughout the late 1800s, trail-weary drovers pushed millions of longhorns through Fort Worth’s dusty streets, bestowing the young frontier outpost with an enduring sobriquet: Cowtown.
Now, two decades into the 21st century, the bustling city of nearly 900,000 is vigorously embracing the rich heritage of its Cowtown roots while broadening its reach to become a major stop on the entertainment and sports circuit.
Dickies Arena, a $540 million showcase adorned with towering murals depicting scenes from Texas’ frontier culture, is the new home of the Fort Worth Stock Show & Rodeo, one of the world’s oldest indoor rodeos. A few miles north, a multiphase effort is underway to reinvigorate and modernize the Fort Worth Stockyards district, one of the city’s most popular tourist magnets.
The October opening of Dickies Arena, next to the Will Rogers Memorial Center, culminated a yearslong campaign led by the billionaire philanthropist Ed Bass, the chairman of the Stock Show & Rodeo. As he toured the 14,000-seat arena on Jan. 17 with his wife, Sasha, hours before the first rodeo performance, his passion for the undertaking was evident with every step.
Standing outside, the 74-year-old businessman described how the mosaic murals above the two main entrances had been crafted from more than a million colored tiles, most no larger than a fingernail. Inside, he pointed out the terrazzo flooring, the architectural interpretations of prairie grasses and wildflowers, the marble-top counters in luxury suites, the giant video display screen that hangs in the arena and weighs 12 times more than a Chevrolet Silverado.
Taken together, these and countless other features form what Mr. Bass describes as “a state-of-the-art 21st-century facility.”
Some residents have questioned the continued use of Fort Worth’s Cowtown nickname when the city is seeking to diversify to compete with cities like Dallas and Phoenix, but Mr. Bass and other Fort Worth leaders see it as a secret weapon, adding a touch of romance and history to broaden Fort Worth’s allure.
“It’s very much a part of our identity,” Mr. Bass said. “And I think we’ll continue to definitely celebrate that.”
At the same time, the arena was designed to help Fort Worth attract major events with a variable seating system that can expand its capacity from 9,300 for rodeos to 14,000 for concerts.
Consequently, Dickies Arena, which bears the name of a Fort Worth workwear brand, is believed to be the only major arena built to anchor a rodeo but able to host other events, ranging from the March Madness basketball tournament to ice shows. The winter rodeo is the only permanently committed tenant, freeing arena officials to court other events through the remaining 11-plus months.
City leaders have long acknowledged that the city’s 1968 downtown convention center — nicknamed the “flying saucer” because of its shape — could no longer compete in attracting concerts, leaving entertainers to bypass Fort Worth in favor of Dallas. The saucer, which in better days hosted Elvis Presley and the Rolling Stones, is also slated for a renovation designed to more than double the city’s convention business.
“We realized we were missing the market on sports and concerts,” Mayor Betsy Price said. “This is going to help us a lot. This will raise the profile.”
The profile has already soared with an eclectic mix of concerts that have featured George Strait, Twenty One Pilots, the Black Keys and Lizzo. Fort Worth fans will have a chance to see the superstar gymnast Simone Biles in June when the arena hosts the United States Gymnastics Championships in a prelude to the Summer Olympics. Also booked are the first and second rounds of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament in 2022.
But from late January to early February, more than 550 truckloads of dirt — the equivalent of 8,250 tons — convert the arena into the Fort Worth Rodeo. At least a foot of dirt covers the steel-enclosed floor as riders atop thundering bulls and bucking broncs perform before thousands of spectators.
Mr. Bass’s vision for a new arena emerged in the early 1990s. After stalling during the 2008-09 recession, the project was completed through a public-private partnership that capped the city’s funding at $225 million while Mr. Bass and other civic benefactors contributed the rest.
The arena was designed by David M. Schwarz Architects, a Washington firm that also designed the two-decade-old Bass Performance Hall and other Fort Worth developments.
“There’s no question you should not know where you are when you are in this building,” said Gregory Hoss, the firm’s principal architect for the arena, referring to the array of Texas flourishes that defines the structure.
Mr. Bass, who studied architecture at Yale, took a hands-on role in virtually every aspect of the arena, from its Art Deco style to the selection of knives and china in a white-tablecloth restaurant. At one point, he displayed his dissatisfaction with a floor design on the concourse — a rope encircling what appears to be a starburst — by sending the architects a lariat for guidance.
The rodeo, which opened in 1918, is an annual staple for residents throughout North Texas and far beyond; Mr. Bass watched his first rodeo sitting on his mother’s lap.
The stock show dates even further back, to 1896, when Fort Worth boosters began promoting the city’s cattle economy to attract two major packing plants. The combined Fort Worth stock show and rodeo was held for decades in the Depression-era Will Rogers Memorial Center, which will continue to host the stock show.
Four miles to the northeast of the arena, the Old West springs to life twice a day when drovers parade a small herd of longhorns for about a half-mile along Exchange Avenue in the heart of the Stockyards. On a recent Sunday afternoon, the district bustled with sightseers, many of whom paid $5 to sit for photographs atop Jake the longhorn or board a stagecoach for a brief excursion. Other Stockyards attractions include the Cowtown Coliseum, which hosts weekly rodeos, and the Texas Cowboy Hall of Fame.
During its heyday, the Stockyards district was known as the “Wall Street of the West,” where Armour and Swift packing plants processed up to 5.2 million head of penned livestock during the height of production in World War II. But after rising costs and other problems forced the plants to close in the 1960s and 1970s, the district’s economic contributions sputtered into decline, even as the Stockyards sustained its presence as a center of tourism and cowboy culture.
Now, an ambitious redevelopment project, fueled by a first-phase infusion of nearly $180 million, has the Stockyards headed toward a 21st-century resurgence.
Mule Alley, a renovated street of retail, office and restaurant space inside the old horse and mule barns, includes the relocation of a downtown high-tech analytics company that brings more than 450 professionals to the district each workday. Hotel Drover, with 200 rooms and suites, will anchor the project after its scheduled opening in the fall.
Stockyards Heritage Development Company, a partnership between California’s Majestic Realty Company and the Hickman Companies of Fort Worth, also plans to build more than 300 apartments.
Fort Worth leaders and real estate experts have more than once used the term “game changer” to describe the impact of the new arena and the Stockyards redevelopment, projecting hundreds of millions of dollars in economic benefits through increased tourism, concert and sports revenue, expanded retail and other gains.
By bringing scores of new events to Fort Worth, Dickies Arena is expected to generate $56.4 million in its first year, according to Highland Market Research. Concerts will form the cornerstone of arena business, according to the study.
The arena will also add a new dimension to the city’s cultural district, which already includes world-renowned art museums. A former dry-ice building is being converted into a boutique hotel just across from the arena, and economic experts believe other developments including restaurants and shops will soon sprout up.
“The arena development opens up a whole new corridor of real estate activity for the cultural district of Fort Worth,” said Brandom Gengelbach, president of the Fort Worth Chamber of Commerce. “This is putting Fort Worth on a larger stage.