Teaching and Learning About Martin Luther King Jr. With The New York Times
Updated with articles and multimedia linking Dr. King’s work to the Black Lives Matter protests that many believe may be the largest movement in United States history.
Please note: In honor of Martin Luther King Day, The Learning Network will not be publishing on Jan. 16, 2023.
Martin Luther King Jr. Day, an annual federal holiday since 1986, celebrates the national civil rights leader who was instrumental in challenging the racial caste system that delineated how millions of Americans lived their lives.
All 50 states celebrate the public holiday on the third Monday in January, but not all states, cities and towns dedicate it solely to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Some package it as a broader celebration of both Dr. King and Confederate leaders, according to this 2017 piece, “Celebration of Martin Luther King Jr. Still Faces Pushback.”
Learning For Justice’s “Dos and Don’ts of Celebrating MLK Day” (and “Going the Extra Mile for MLK Day”) remind us that although the holiday is just one day — and Black History Month is just one month — Dr. King’s message of equality and justice for all are best embedded in the curriculum all year round.
The New York Times reported on Dr. King’s campaign and on the civil rights movement in general, and continues to report on related issues of segregation and inequality today. And on April 4, 2018, the 50th anniversary of Dr. King’s assassination, The Times published a rich collection, from articles and Op-Eds to photos and video, to celebrate his life and legacy.
Below, we’ve chosen both recent pieces as well as pieces from the Times archives published during Dr. King’s lifetime. We also suggest several teaching ideas for connecting his message with our world today.
How do you teach about Dr. King? Let us know in the comments.
What would Dr. King make of America today?
In a 2021 piece, “The Words of Martin Luther King Jr. Reverberate in a Tumultuous Time,” Audra D. S. Burch, John Eligon and Michael Wines write:
These reporters asked Dr. Carson and others from across the country to choose words from Dr. King and reflect on how they resonate today. Invite your students to read what they had to say, then, perhaps, answer the question, “Where do we go from here?” themselves.
For deeper investigation, they might have a look at the special April 4, 2018 Times interactive headlined “Martin Luther King Jr.: 50 Years Later, His Battles Live On.” Here is how the piece begins:
They might also watch this Opinion video, in which Dr. King’s son, Martin Luther King III, explores his father’s messages about poverty and workers’ rights, which he says are more relevant now than ever:


How do your students see Dr. King’s words resonating in their own lives and communities — and in our nation and around the world? Invite them to click through this rich collection, which links to both new and archival pieces, as they address the question, What would Dr. King make of America today?
As they work, students might highlight quotes and ideas that pair especially well with other things they are reading, learning about, listening to or viewing. For instance, how do they speak to more contemporary works, from visual art on city streets and in galleries, to music like Beyoncé’s “Formation” and Childish Gambino’s “This Is America,” or to novels like “Dear Martin” by Nic Stone or Angie Thomas’s “The Hate U Give”? Why?
As a culminating activity, a class might create a gallery of images and quotes that bridge Dr. King’s battles with those we are fighting today.
The protests that broke out in the summer of 2020 in response to the death of George Floyd and many others became what scholars believe may be the largest movement in United States history. In June, Joe Biden, then on the campaign trail, noted, “Even Dr. King’s assassination did not have the worldwide impact that George Floyd’s death did … People are really realizing this is a battle for the soul of America.”
Do your students agree? Did any of them attend any of the marches that reached every corner of America, and many places around the world? Do they know any of the thousands of Americans who streamed to the Lincoln Memorial in September, 2020 to rekindle the spirit of the 1963 March on Washington?
You might ask them: What wisdom can Dr. King and the civil rights movement of the 1960s offer the activists of the Black Lives Matter movement? Why? In this article, those who fought with Dr. King offer seven lessons and warnings about both how to march and how to build a movement. Which do you think are most useful for Black Lives Matter activists today? If you have studied the work of Dr. King, are there any you would add to the list? Why?
Do you have to be disobedient if you want justice? How would your students answer?
How much do your students know about the civil rights movement? Test their knowledge with this 13-question quiz The Times published in 2019 in honor of Dr. King’s 90th birthday. Then consider: What did working to advance racial and social justice look like in the 1950s and 60s? What does it look like now?
In a 2015 Magazine article, “Teaching Martin Luther King Jr. in the Age of Freddie Gray,” Syreeta McFadden writes about discussing “Letter From Birmingham Jail” with her students at a community college in Manhattan:
Read about the rest of the discussion that day, and think about the implications for your own classroom. How does teaching about Dr. King and the civil rights movement look different today, after movements like #takeaknee and #MeToo, and protests from the Women’s March  to the events in Charlottesville, Va., in August, 2017 and the Black Lives Matter movement?
What about after the pro-Trump riot at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021? On The Learning Network, we asked students what they thought about that riot, and many of them spoke passionately on what they saw as a double standard in how the police treated these insurgents and the way they have treated Black Lives Matter protesters. Do your students agree?
To think more about Dr. King and the history of protest, students might read one or both of the following.
In a 2017 Op-Ed, “Which Martin Luther King Are We Celebrating Today?,” Jason Sokol writes:
And in a 2020 Op-Ed, “Without the Right to Protest, America Is Doomed to Fail,” the activist Patrisse Cullors looks at the Black Lives Matter movement as part of a long history:
She also asks:
Have your students read these pieces in preparation for a discussion on the role of protest in America in the past and today. What lines resonate? Where do they stand on questions about “disobedience” and violence as protest? What questions do these pieces raise about activism in 2021? What advice or help do they offer?
The Martin Luther King Jr. Day of Service, signed into law by President Bill Clinton in 1994, challenges Americans to make the holiday into a day of active volunteer service to honor Dr. King.
Have students research ideas in the spirit of service here, and then design a day of service for themselves and their classmates, or for their family members, and present these ideas to their class. They can also find resources in our lesson plan Making a Difference: Ideas for Giving, Service Learning and Social Action.
Invite your students to watch Dr. King’s “I Have a Dream” speech. Why is it still so powerful over 50 years later?
That’s the question we ask in our Text to Text lesson plan that pairs Dr. King’s words with an article by the Times book critic Michiko Kakutani, “The Lasting Power of Dr. King’s Dream Speech.” In it, we pose questions about the figurative language and other poetic and oratorical devices, such as repetition and theme, he uses, as well as questions about what it still has to say to us today. There are also several ideas for assessing how much progress on Dr. King’s dream our nation has made since he spoke.
Consider, for example, Adeel Hassan’s 2019 interview with Dr. King’s son about how far, or close, we are to achieving his father’s dream. Martin Luther King III said:
Students can be invited to read the rest of the piece and then post answers to our Student Opinion question, What Does Dr. King’s Legacy Mean to You?
Have students listen to some of the songs written in honor of Dr. King, and then write their own song. For example, see Stevie Wonder’s “Happy Birthday Song,” originally written for Dr. King after there was opposition to creating the federal holiday, above.
Students might also listen to this one by James Taylor, which is not part of the Billboard list, above. Here is the first stanza:
For additional ideas for teaching history and social studies with music see our lesson plans Teaching With Protest Music and The Ten-Dollar Founding Father Without a Father: Teaching and Learning With ‘Hamilton.’
Teaching Ideas and Resources to Help Students Make Sense of the George Floyd Protests
Text to Text: ‘I Have a Dream’ and ‘The Lasting Power of Dr. King’s Dream Speech’
Celebrating Black History With The New York Times
Learning With the ‘Black History, Continued’ Series
The Power to Change the World: A Teaching Unit on Student Activism in History and Today
A Teacher-Created Unit on Race and Racism Using The New York Times
First Encounters With Race and Racism: Teaching Ideas for Classroom Conversations
Lesson of the Day: ‘What Is Black Love Today?’
Lesson of the Day: ‘When Blackness Is a Superpower’
Lesson of the Day: ‘Four Studies of Black Healing’
Lesson of the Day: ‘Bringing Black History to Life in the Great Outdoors’
Lesson of the Day: ‘Why Are More Black Kids Suicidal? A Search for Answers.’
Lesson of the Day: Amanda Gorman and ‘The Hill We Climb’
Lesson of the Day: ‘Listen Up: These Young Black Poets Have a Message’
Teaching About Charlottesville With Resources from The New York Times
How Teachers Are Bringing Charlottesville to the Classroom
Text to Text: Colin Kaepernick’s National Anthem Protest and Frederick Douglass’s ‘What to the Slave is the 4th of July?’
The Death of Michael Brown: Teaching About Ferguson
Text to Text: ‘What Would Malcolm X Think?’ and ‘After the Bombing’
Everyday Voices: Finding Black History in Unexpected Places
What Is Your Reaction to the Days of Protest That Have Followed the Death of George Floyd? and What Students Are Saying About the George Floyd Protests
Civil Conversation Challenge for Teenagers, Forum 3: The Fight for Racial Justice and the results: What Students Are Saying About Race and Racism in America
How Much Have You Learned About Black History?
What Does Dr. King’s Legacy Mean to You?
How Much Racism Do You Face in Your Daily Life?
How Should Parents Teach Their Children About Race and Racism?
Does the United States Owe Reparations to the Descendants of Enslaved People?
Does the N.F.L. Have a Race Problem?
Is Racial and Economic Diversity in Schools Important?
Why Is Race So Hard to Talk About?
Should Confederate Statues Be Removed or Remain in Place?
Is America ‘Backsliding’ on Race?
Do You Ever Talk About Issues of Race and Class With Your Friends?
Have You Experienced Racism or Other Kinds of Discrimination in School?
How Should Parents Teach Their Children About Race and Racism?
What Is the Purpose of Teaching U.S. History?
26 Mini-Films for Exploring Race, Bias and Identity With Students
“Why I Won’t Teach My Son ‘Black Codes’’
“How Dr. King Changed a Sanitation Worker’s Life”
"What It Means to Be Black in America”
“Traveling While Black”
“Taking a Knee and Taking Down A Monument”
“A Conversation with My Black Son"
“Long Island’s Enduring Black Beachfront Community”
‘‘‘Baptized in Blackness’: Why Homecoming Is Vital to the Black College Experience”
‘Trayvon Martin Is Still Making America Confront Its Original Sin’
Oct. 15, 1962 | Martin Luther King Wins The Nobel Prize for Peace (PDF)
Aug. 29, 1963 | 200,000 March for Civil Rights in Orderly Washington Rally (PDF)
March 22, 1965 | Freedom March Begins at Selma (PDF)
March 25, 1965 | 25,000 Go to Alabama’s Capitol (PDF)
April 4, 1968 | Martin Luther King is Slain in Memphis (PDF)
In Our Pages 1966: King Leads Pupils in March
In Our Pages 1966: Rock Hits Dr. King in Chicago Riot
In Our Pages 1966: Martin Luther King Marches
March on Washington Original Coverage
The Last Year of Martin Luther King Jr.’s Life, According to The Times
The Day King Was Shot: 26 Times Articles That Told the Story
Martin Luther King Jr.’s Original New York Times Obituary
Opinion | A Civil Rights Quiz (2019)
Martin Luther King Jr.: 50 Years Later, His Battles Live On (2018)
‘I’ve Been to the Mountaintop,’ Dr. King’s Last Sermon Annotated (2018)
50 Years Later, It Feels Familiar: How America Fractured in 1968 (2018)
National Civil Rights Museum (2003)
Martin Luther King in Connecticut: Closer to a Promised Land (2016)
Bob Fitch, Photographer of Civil Rights Era (2016)
Witnesses to History, 50 Years Later (2013)
Scenes From the 50th Anniversary of the March on Washington (2013)
In Consecrated Company: The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial (2011)
A Retreat for Dr. King (2008)
A Man on the Street (2008)
The Prophet of the Civil Rights Movement (2004)
Martin Luther King Jr.’s Family Tells Senate to Legislate, ‘Not Celebrate’ (2022)
How Dr. King Changed a Sanitation Worker’s Life (2018)
The Ferry: A Civil Rights Story (2015)
Memories of Martin Luther King Jr. (2008)
Times Topics | Martin Luther King Jr.
The Words of Martin Luther King Jr. Reverberate in a Tumultuous Time (2021)
Opinion | The Youthful Movement That Made Martin Luther King Jr. (2021)
Dr. King’s ‘Dream’ Speech: His Son Reflects on How Far We Have Come (2019)
Opinion | Are You a Moderate? Think Again (2019)
Whose Neighborhood Should Get a Street Named for Dr. King? (2018)
Dorothy Cotton, Rights Champion and Close Aide to King, Dies at 88 (2018)
‘Glee, Satisfaction and Weeping’: How America Reacted When Martin Luther King Died (2018)
Will America Choose King’s Dream or Trump’s Nightmare? (2018)
We Forgot What Dr. King Believed In (2018)
Op-Ed by Jesse Jackson: How Dr. King Lived Is Why He Died (2018)
‘I’m Glad That I’m Equal’: Six Students on Dr. King’s Legacy (2018)
50 Years After Dr. King’s Death, New Lessons for Today (2018)
No Racial Barrier Left to Break (Except All of Them) (2017)
Decades Later, Memphis to Compensate Black Sanitation Strikers of 1968 (2017)
Does This Flag Make You Flinch? (2016)
Samuel Billy Kyles, Witness to King’s Last Moments, Dies at 81 (2016)
Dr. Quentin D. Young, Public Health and Civil Rights Advocate, Dies at 92 (2016)
At Soul Food Restaurants, Activism Was on the Menu (2016)
Saluting a Dream, and Adapting It for a New Era (2013)
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Dedicated in Washington (2011)
Opinion | Dr. King’s Dreams (2011)
Op-Ed by Cornel West | Dr. King Weeps From His Grave (2011)
In Honoring Dr. King, Rote Finds Relevance in Obama (2009)
Op-Ed by Jesse L. Jackson Sr.| Dr. King’s Last Birthday (2009)
Op-Ed by Taylor Branch | The Last Wish of Martin Luther King (2008)
Senate Votes Holiday to Honor Dr. King (1983)
A Man to Remember: Commemorating Martin Luther King, Jr.
Teaching Selma: A Civil Rights Struggle Captured in Primary Sources
For Martin Luther King, Jr. Day: Exploring Photographs of Civil Rights Movement Leaders
Honoring Our History Through Artwork: MLK Jr. in Primary Sources
Looking Behind the March on Washington: Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., the Civil Rights Movement and Labor in Primary Sources
Day of National Service — MLKDAY.gov
The Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change
The Constitution Center: The Story of Martin Luther King Jr. Day — A Legacy of Service
MLK Jr. National Historic Site, Georgia. National Park Service