Issues of Gender and Electability in the Democratic Race
To the Editor:
Re “Are We Ready to Elect a Woman President?,” by Michelle Cottle (Editorial Observer, Jan. 16):
Of course a woman can be elected president. If some 40,000 Trump voters in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania had voted for Hillary Clinton, she would have added an Electoral College victory to her three-million-vote popular victory.
The more immediate question for Democratic voters is: “If we nominate a woman this year, are we less likely to beat Trump?” The answer is, probably. Sexist attitudes about women candidates cost them votes, and this is most true for president, since some voters have trouble envisioning a woman in the commander in chief role.
Amy Klobuchar or Elizabeth Warren might have qualities that offset that inherent disadvantage, but it’s legitimate for Democratic voters to ask if that’s a risk that they want to take.
Ms. Warren’s debate statement that she and Ms. Klobuchar are undefeated, but the male candidates have collectively lost 10 elections, says nothing about the eventual nominee’s prospects this year. The two women have won their races in solidly blue states.
Sexism in elections is an ugly fact, but it is a fact that must be taken into account in the fight to beat Mr. Trump.
Thomas F. Wieder
Ann Arbor, Mich.
To the Editor:
Of course it is a legitimate empirical question as to whether a woman or octogenarian or someone from some new demographic can win a presidential election if the object of the election is to win. As a moral issue it is a totally different matter, and one that I doubt Elizabeth Warren or Bernie Sanders differ on.
But the press is missing the bigger issue raised by the reported Sanders allegation: Which candidate can bring in voters beyond his or her obvious base? It’s not clear that President Trump can and why he may lose, but it’s not clear that either Ms. Warren or Mr. Sanders can either. An election is won on the margins, meaning those beyond your hard-core believers whom you can attract.
On that score both Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders are a worry.
Andrew Gold
New York
To the Editor:
Re “Warren Confronts the Skeptics Who Fear Her Plans Go Too Far” (front page, Jan. 16):
The “electability” notion propagated by the media threatens to undermine our electoral process. Our electoral system should not require psychological gymnastics. Each voter has a responsibility to simply cast a vote for his or her preferred candidate; that is good-faith participation in our electoral system.
When we substitute our projections of our neighbors’ preferences for our own preferences, we make it impossible for the electoral system to accurately tally up its constituents’ preferences.
Whom do you think you are helping when you look for an electable candidate instead of a good one? Doesn’t it seem that the electability boogeyman is simply a tool for preserving the power of entrenched interests?
Jonathan Allmaier
Bronx
To the Editor:
Re “Of Course Bernie Can Win” (column, Jan. 11):
I agree with Bret Stephens that Bernie Sanders can win both the Democratic nomination and the presidency. He can win because he offers policies that people think will be good for them.
He speaks of those policies whenever he talks, and he stays on point and is consistent over time. He may be underestimated by polls in which people who like his ideas shy away from him through fear that he can’t win.
The results might be different if people indicated whom they like, rather than whom they think everyone else likes.
Susan Sugarman
Princeton, N.J.
The writer is a professor of psychology at Princeton University.