Coronavirus, Japanese Coal, Iowa Caucuses: Your Tuesday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Only three weeks since emerging in the city of Wuhan, the new coronavirus has killed more than 360 people out of some 17,200 infected in mainland China, surpassing the toll of 349 there from the SARS outbreak in the early 2000s.
Though the virus seems to be readily transmitted between humans, its apparent death rate of about 2 percent is lower than the 9.6 percent for SARS, and recoveries have risen.
The U.S. has 11 cases, and dozens of people are being tested. Here are the latest updates.
On the ground: Our correspondent in Wuhan reported from a new, 1,000-bed hospital opened from scratch in 10 days (and still partly under construction).   In Beijing, empty streets and deserted parks have made for “dystopian vistas.” President Xi Jinping said Monday that the Communist Party was facing a “major test,” while party leaders urged better “propaganda” and “opinion guidance.”
Economic fallout: Chinese stocks plunged on Monday, the first day of trading since the Lunar New Year, and a conservative forecast sees China’s economic growth slipping this year, which will have global repercussions. The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, and Russia, agreed to meet in Vienna to discuss possibly cutting output to stabilize falling prices. Still, European and American stocks were up.
Related: Hong Kong’s government said Monday that it would close more border checkpoints, as some medical workers went on strike to demand a complete ban on entries from mainland China. And huge complications have confronted Americans seeking to leave China.
Senators heard closing statements, with each side allotted two hours. Here’s our live coverage.
House representatives, arguing that President Trump denied security aid to Ukraine to pressure its government into announcing investigations into Democrats, said he would feel free to abuse his power again if not removed from office. Mr. Trump’s lawyers argued that the case was rushed and that “the answer is elections, not impeachment.”
With acquittal all but assured in the final vote, expected Wednesday, the proceedings carried little suspense.
Looking ahead: Mr. Trump is set to deliver the State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Tuesday. His speechwriters have tried to stay out of the spotlight.
History and mathematics suggest that no more than four of the Democratic candidates will emerge from Monday’s caucuses with a plausible case to be the party’s presidential nominee.
We’ll have live election results starting at 8 p.m. Eastern. Here’s what to watch for.
A Times polling average found Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden tied for first place in the state, which has an imperfect record of predicting a party’s eventual nominee.
Go deeper: Democrats are united in opposition to President Trump but deeply divided over ideology. Any nominee might be left to corral a fractious coalition of moderates, socialists and Trump-repelled independents
“The Daily”: In our most recent episode, we asked caucusgoers how they felt about the election.
Japan is promoting the upcoming Olympic Games in Tokyo as one of the greenest ever. But at the same time, the government is pursuing an energy strategy fired by coal, one of the dirtiest sources of electricity.
Twenty-two new coal-fired power plants are planned across the country. Together they would emit almost as much carbon dioxide annually as all the passenger cars sold each year in the U.S.
A coal-burning plant set for the city of Yokosuka faces a lawsuit by residents who say it was improperly rubber-stamped by the government.
Context: Tainted by the Fukushima disaster, nuclear energy has gone from providing a third of Japan’s power to a small fraction.
Even on the worst day this fire season in Australia, around 90 percent of the firefighters battling blazes have been volunteers — like the one above, in New South Wales. In earlier fire seasons, they might have spent a few days with a hose, but this season’s infernos have consumed their time and fortitude.
Pushed to the limit by new climate extremes, Australia’s volunteer firefighting system faces a test of its existence.
Syria: Turkey launched deadly airstrikes against Syrian government forces in Syria’s northwest. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey said that as many as 35 Syrian troops were killed, and he warned Syria’s ally Russia against stepping in.
Britain: Mayor Sadiq Khan of London accused the government of failing to give judges the tools they need to keep people who pose terrorist threats in prison, a day after a man who had recently been released went on a stabbing rampage in South London.
Super Bowl: The Kansas City Chiefs came back to defeat the San Francisco 49ers, 31-20, for the franchise’s first championship since the 1969 season. Another winner: Jennifer Lopez, whose halftime performance showed that “dress your age” has no meaning any more.
Snapshot: Above, a protester working on a mural in downtown Baghdad, which is overflowing with political art.
What we’re reading: This piece from The Chronicle Review. “It poses an interesting question for academics,” Lynda Richardson, a Travel editor, writes. “Is unending email making professors stupid? Perhaps something for us all to ponder.”
Cook: With homemade hamburger helper, you don’t have to be a stickler about measurements or ingredients. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.)
Watch: Taylor Swift’s Netflix documentary, “Miss Americana,” is a Critic’s Pick.
Go: The Seattle Asian Art Museum is reopening after a two-year, $56 million renovation.
Smarter Living: These seven podcasts can help you nurture a healthier mind and body.
Sydney Ember, a reporter on our politics team, moved to Iowa to get to know the state ahead of the caucuses. She wrote about her experiences for our Reader Center. This is a condensed version.
DES MOINES — I was in a tree.
It was November and I had been in Iowa for less than a month, and set out to profile someone who brings Iowa to life for our readers. Rob Sand, the state auditor, pitched himself as a subject — and then took me bowhunting for deer.
That turned out to involve climbing a tree and quietly waiting for a deer. As my fingers and toes lost feeling in the cold, I thought, not for the last time in my three-month stint: What am I doing here?
My goal was to understand the people of Iowa and the issues they care about, in addition to the presidential candidates spending time and resources in the state and the web of volunteers, staff members and strategists who help them.
I spent many days at campaign events in high school gymnasiums and college auditoriums and senior centers, analyzing the candidates’ messages and talking to voters.
I learned that many Democrats here want above all to beat President Trump — a desire that made it extraordinarily difficult for them to choose a candidate. Some Republicans and independents wanted that, too.
I learned that cars with all-wheel drive can still fishtail in the snow and that pizza from Casey’s General Store is delicious. (But no, I did not try the breakfast pizza, a particularly polarizing Iowa delicacy.)
It might be more practical, and less expensive, for The Times and other news organizations not to move reporters out to Iowa before the caucuses. But there is no substitute for spending a lot of time here, talking to Iowans every day and experiencing the all-consuming nature of the run-up to the state’s caucuses firsthand.
