Your Monday Briefing
The coronavirus outbreak that began in Wuhan, China, is on track to become a global pandemic, top infectious disease experts tell The Times.
Here’s the latest on the outbreak, which has now killed at least 360 people, mostly in China, and prompted many countries to suspend flights to China and deny entry to visitors departing from or transiting through the Chinese mainland.
We also have an in-depth report from Wuhan on how Chinese officials put secrecy ahead of transparency in the early days of the crisis, and a look at the desperate search for treatment at the city’s overcrowded hospitals.
Details: There are 17,000 confirmed infections so far, but some epidemiological models estimate that the real number of cases is 100,000 or more. That’s an enormous leap beyond what virologists saw when SARS and MERS emerged, although the new virus has a lower mortality rate.
Today: Stocks in Shanghai opened 8.7 percent lower, while shares in the southern Chinese boomtown of Shenzhen fell 9 percent. Markets in China had been closed since Jan. 23 for the Lunar New Year holiday.
What’s next: Some Hong Kong medical workers went on strike today, as part of a campaign to press the semiautonomous city to close all of its border checkpoints to visitors from mainland China.
In a speech today, Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain is expected to say that Britain will “prosper” even if it can’t negotiate its preferred terms for a trade deal with the European Union.
Mr. Johnson has called Britain’s withdrawal from the world’s largest trading bloc last Friday, after nearly half a century, a “moment of real national renewal” that will increase its economic output.
He may yet prove his critics wrong. But, if not, British voters will have only his government to blame.
Details: The British foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said on Sunday that Britain expected the bloc to “follow through on their commitments to a Canada-style free trade agreement.”
Reaction: Britons told The Times why they were celebrating or mourning over Brexit.
Go deeper: Our London-based reporter sees the soccer team she plays on — which includes Leavers and Remainers, immigrants and transplanted Europeans — as a snapshot of the country that embodies many of its divisions.
Catch up: These photos tell the story of Brexit Day, and our columnist Roger Cohen called Brexit a “self-amputation.”
As the Republican-controlled Senate prepares to acquit President Trump of impeachment charges on Wednesday, his Democratic rivals are competing furiously over who should face him in this November’s presidential election.
The first test comes today, when voters in Iowa will pick their favorite Democratic candidate. We’ll have live coverage at nytimes.com.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont appears favored to win, but a victory in Iowa’s first-in-the-nation nominating contest is hardly a ticket to the eventual nomination.
Details: Here’s a primer on how Iowa’s nominating contest works.
Related: Iowa’s electorate, which plays an outsize role in American presidential politics, is more white and rural than most of the country.
Go deeper: Mr. Trump’s antipathy toward his possible 2020 election opponents — especially Michael Bloomberg, a former New York City mayor — is spilling into public view.
Looking ahead: Mr. Trump will give his annual “State of the Union” address on Tuesday night in Washington.
Around 90 percent of the firefighters battling this season’s blazes in Australia are volunteers, a ratio unmatched in any other developed country where wildfires rage.
Climate change is now making Australia even more combustible and deadly, and 11 firefighters have died so far this season. Some volunteer firefighters now want compensation, professional training and better equipment — changes that could help modernize a decades-old strategy.
Yet for individuals on the front lines, our Australia bureau chief writes, the pressure to be a hero can be overwhelming.
The billionaire Leslie Wexner bought Victoria’s Secret in 1982, and turned it into a lingerie powerhouse with annual fashion shows that became a global cultural phenomenon.
But the company was hiding something: a degrading work environment where women were objectified and complaints of sexual harassment were buried, according to a Times investigation.
And the man who managed Mr. Wexner’s multibillion-dollar fortune? The sex criminal Jeffrey Epstein, who lured some young women by posing as a Victoria’s Secret recruiter.
London attack: A man in South London, who was suspected of stabbing people in what the authorities described as a “terrorist related” incident, was shot and killed by the police. The man had been wearing a fake explosive device strapped to his body.
Israel: Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s cabinet did not vote on Sunday, as expected, on whether to extend Israeli sovereignty over substantial parts of the occupied West Bank. The Trump administration has urged Mr. Netanyahu to delay any effective annexation of territory at least until after he contests a March 2 election.
Berlin rents: A measure that takes effect this month will freeze or lower rental prices for five years on more than 1.5 million apartments in a city where only 18 percent of residents own their homes. Critics say it will hamper growth and frighten off developers willing to build affordable housing.
In memoriam: Leila Janah, an activist and entrepreneur who employed thousands of desperately poor people in Africa and India, died at 37 of a rare soft-tissue cancer.
Snapshot: Above, a yacht party in Tucacas, Venezuela, northwest of the capital. The country’s authoritarian leader, Nicolás Maduro, has relaxed controls on the private sector in recent months, increasing domestic luxury consumption even as basic services crumble.
Australian Open: Novak Djokovic prevailed in five sets against Dominic Thiem on Sunday to claim his 17th Grand Slam singles title and take the No. 1 ranking back from Rafael Nadal.
Baftas: “1917,” Sam Mendes’s visually extravagant World War I drama, took seven awards at the EE British Academy Film Awards — despite receiving mixed reviews in Britain.
Super Bowl winner: The Kansas City Chiefs rallied in the fourth quarter to beat the San Francisco 49ers, 31-20.
What we’re listening to: The “Best Known Method” podcast. Our health reporter Anahad O’Connor welcomed its return for a second season. “Greatly enjoyed this discussion with Professor Emily Oster,” he tweeted, “especially now that I’m a dad and can benefit from her parenting insights.”
Cook: Looking for a quick Monday dinner with minimal prep? Try lemony shrimp and bean stew.
Go: “Van Eyck: An Optical Revolution,” at the Museum of Fine Arts in Ghent, features 13 original van Eyck paintings alongside 100 artworks by the Flemish painter’s contemporaries.
Read: A book by the British journalist Richard Davies, on why life at the world’s margins holds valuable lessons for the future, is among 10 new titles that we recommend.
Smarter Living: What does it mean to have a serious drinking problem? A Times journalist weighed in, based on her own experience.
The yearslong exit from the European Union happened at midnight Friday in Brussels, 11 p.m. in Britain itself. (Because, of course, they’re in different time zones.)
Our London correspondent Ben Mueller was on duty. “It felt a little anticlimactic,” he said. “There had been such fireworks, and then the legislation passed without contention.”
Alcohol was banned in Parliament Square for the big celebration, but vendors brought in beer. “They couldn’t do without it,” Ben said.
The immediate difference? “Britain no longer has representation or say in the machinery of the European Union.”
Many other aspects of the departure remain, to be resolved (or not) during a transition period that will end when 2020 does. Prime Minister Boris Johnson has already signaled a tough stand for trade talks that will begin in March.
Ben noted that even hopes to have the moment marked by a bong from Big Ben (no relation) were dashed. Westminster’s famed four-faced clock is under renovation, and speeding the process up to allow the bell to sound would have cost 500,000 pounds. Efforts to raise the money fell short and parliamentary authorities nixed the plan.
So a recording of Big Ben was played outside, and inside 10 Downing Street, Mr. Johnson banged a gong.