State of Confusion
SUNDAY PUZZLE — I made a snap assumption when I saw the title of today’s puzzle, and I was right, but that “spoiler” made today’s solve no less enjoyable or difficult. There’s a certain delicious frisson to seeing your suspicions bear out, as long as the road you’re taking isn’t dull, which today’s grid certainly isn’t. After all, people watch their favorite movies dozens of times, and classic sports games pop up on the television. (I am now thinking of a movie that’s out right now in which a nail-biter of a basketball series figures prominently, and the 2012 footage is taken from real life* — plenty of viewers surely knew its outcome.)
David Steinberg and Evan Mahnken are both 23 years old. That’s according to Will Shortz’s print introduction, which also mentions that they met at a crossword tournament two years ago and collaborated on this puzzle by email. But the age thing is kind of marvelous. As many of you know, Mr. Steinberg is one of the old souls behind the “Pre-Shortzian Puzzle Project,” and has put a tremendous effort into digitizing all of The New York Times puzzles that had been relegated to microfilm or scratchy PDFs. If this piques your interest, visit that site for all kinds of interviews and historical tidbits about puzzle people.
*Spoiler alert for “Uncut Gems” at that link!
53A: The “warrant officer” here threw me off, because I do not know my military rankings, and I thought of bounty hunters — you know, people who go get criminals who have warrants out on their arrest. So LOOIE was a head-scratcher. It’s just a casual shortening of Lieutenant, one of the higher-ups.
63A: I really adored this screw-up, and I’ll be surprised if it doesn’t prevent the happy music for some of you. I had “aver” at 51D, a perfectly appropriate answer for “Maintain,” so with crosses I got to “creaked” in this spot. This also seemed apropos to me — isn’t a squealing floorboard or opening door a classic tip-off to supernatural forces, in a movie or book? That must be what Messrs. Mahnken and Steinberg mean by “Gave up the ghost," I figured. How clever of them. Of course, it’s actually CROAKED, a respectful and poetic term for “died,” which is how ghosts get free of their physical trappings.
101A: “Wilbur” makes me think of “some pig” (not a sitcom, though). The name in this clue refers to a human, but the show is titled after a horse, MR. ED. Tough letters to deduce from, and even though this show is a bona fide classic, I don’t see it referred to much these days.
114A: This entry has appeared in the Times puzzle 34 times, going back to 1953, but it has always been clued as a winsome cartoon character. The nose BOOP is probably here to stay, simply because it’s a catchy term for a universal action that’s been around, probably, since noses.
4D: This puzzle was ironically light on geography fill; this one was the trickiest for me, because it left out the normal “Gold Rush” reference when referring to DAWSON City. You can go pan for nuggets!
41D: Interesting that this is a debut. It’s a somewhat obvious choice, given the clue, but there are cheeses and shoes, among other things, so the TULIP BULB might not pop into your head. Soon enough, they’ll be popping up everywhere.
If you’re a cryptic aficionado, the title of this puzzle reads classic cryptic: “Confusion,” and other words that mean chaos and disorder, tend to tip a solver off to an anagram, the reordering of letters. I must add that in a (possible) coincidence, there is an actual cryptic puzzle running today (in the Times Magazine, as well as on the app) that has a crossover clue at 9-Across, like when two prime-time TV shows overlap casts for some episode to try to get you hooked on both shows. If you’ve ever had an urge to try a cryptic but felt intimidated, go over there and look at 9A; it’ll give you a start. In addition, I always do a post on Wordplay that tries to explain every clue, and if you love seeing people who are supposed to know what they’re doing get things wrong, then you really shouldn’t miss it. I am often humbled by the cryptic, but continue to love it and so will you.
All right! Back to business here.
As you will surely notice, there are seven across entries today with shaded or circled letters, depending on what platform you’re solving. The clue for each one has a bracketed secondary clue — this is the part where my light bulb clicked on, because those secondary clues all tip you off to various United State nicknames — like “the Empire State” for New York, an example that doesn’t appear in the grid today. There’s no “confusion” there, I don’t think. What else could [Wolverine State], which is the secondary clue at 23A, be?
Let’s go one further, and say that a solver even knows what state that is. Let’s say that a solver counts those boxes or bubbles and finds that the number of letters in said state are the same — eight — which is another strong hint that we’re looking to just rearrange those letters.
Does this help you answer the main part of this clue at 23A, “Voice box?” It didn't do much for me! I had to get plenty of downs before I figured out ANSWERING MACHINE in this spot. It was only after the fact that I confirmed my suspicions, as those shaded letters were the same letters in MICHIGAN.
The second example, at 33A, is probably the most crystalline. First of all, the primary clue — “Safari sighting” — is quite straightforward, unless you decided to go all pun crazy and look for internet references, thinking of Safari the Mac browser. Also, the anagrammed U.S. state makes up all but one letter of the final entry, and that secondary clue — [Golden State] — is perhaps the most recognizable state nickname. So take California and jumble up those letters — voilà! AFRICAN LIO — N.
And that’s it! That’s the trick. Not all of the theme answers have pun answers like the first one, but they all follow the same method: Brackets hold clue for the state, state is anagrammed into the shaded/bubbled boxes, regular clue is for the overall answer. The originality and challenge today, I’d say, lie in how subtly those rearranged letters sneak into those difficult themers. I found it highly satisfying to figure them out after knowing the rules of the game.
If you’re stuck on one, I’ll give you all the states in order from top to bottom, and then the entries in the same order. I do find that good old-fashioned pen and paper can help with a long anagram like some of these, though — just line up the words and cross out letters as you go.
Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
What did you think?