$1.4 Million Homes in California
Once the vacation retreat of the actor Lionel Barrymore, this single-story house sits on a hillside in Laurel Canyon, about three miles northwest of Hollywood and 10 miles northwest of Downtown Los Angeles. Pace, a popular Italian restaurant, is a few minutes’ drive up Laurel Canyon Boulevard. Trader Joe’s and Chateau Marmont are half a mile south, on Sunset Boulevard.
Size: 1,506 square feet
Price per square foot: $930
Indoors: In slightly less than a decade of ownership, the sellers created a new kitchen from three existing rooms and converted a spa area into a studio. They also laid new stained hardwood floors, redid the bathrooms, replaced windows and doors with thermally efficient models and installed a new septic tank.
The original front door opens to a living room with crown molding and a gas fireplace. An archway and an island define the kitchen, which has wood cabinets with marble countertops and Viking appliances.
Another wide archway leads to the dining room, where a Currey & Company chandelier made from recycled glass bottles hangs from the peaked, open-beam ceiling. Beyond is the two-tiered art-and-music studio, whose upper platform leads through French doors to a rear patio.
A bathroom with a teak door is below the studio; it contains a claw-foot slipper tub with a shower head and sprayer, next to a wall of herringbone-patterned marble tile.
The master and guest bedrooms have a connecting door and share a bathroom with a barrel-vaulted wood ceiling, a marble-topped vanity with double sinks and a walk-in glass-and-marble shower. The master includes a pair of closets with double doors; the guest room has direct access to a concrete-and-brick play area in back.
Outdoor space: The turf-covered back patio is enclosed by low stucco walls. The play area steps up to a treehouse set among greenery. The living room opens to a front terrace. Parking is in an attached two-door garage.
Taxes: $17,500 (estimated)
Contact: Thomas O’Rourke, Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices, 310-770-0221; bhhscalifornia.com
The actress Loretta Young lived in this custom-built house in the Deepwell Estates neighborhood of south Palm Springs from 1993 until her death in 2000. (Renovations were undertaken by the following owner, including a remodel of the kitchen and master bathroom.) The area, which is several minutes from downtown, is known for its lush plantings, extraordinary San Jacinto mountain views and lack of gustiness in a city swept by desert wind. William Holden, Jerry Lewis and Audrey Hepburn also had homes there.
This property is five minutes northwest of the Smoke Tree shopping center, a mall next to the historic Smoke Tree Ranch. It is 10 minutes southwest of the Palm Springs International Airport.
Size: 3,510 square feet
Price per square foot: $397
Indoors: Solid bronze doors molded with a sunburst pattern open to a verdant courtyard-like space with a terrazzo bridge flanked by ponds that once held koi. The bridge leads to double glass doors set into a curving glass wall.
From there, you step into a circular living room with terrazzo flooring covered by a custom rug and a molded plaster dome ceiling illuminated by lights that change color on command. A gas fireplace on a floating terrazzo hearth includes a giant metal hood with a faux finish and a large original sculptural embellishment.
A dining room and media room extend off the living room; a partially covered rear deck overlooks the saltwater pool. The narrow, curving kitchen is lined in wood-and-granite cabinetry with integrated stainless steel appliances; it opens into a bar area with access to the pool area.
The three bedroom suites include a master that walks out to the pool area; it has an enormous L-shaped bathroom with a rain shower and private grotto with an outdoor shower. There is also a large office, as well as two laundry rooms, one in the two-car garage and the other in the master suite.
Outdoor space: The property has palms, fountains, hedges, statuary, trellises and an outdoor firepit between a pair of bountiful grapefruit trees.
Taxes: $17,438 (estimated)
Contact: Randy Roy, Macoy Capital, 760-902-1451; flexmls.com
This house in the Carmel Highlands is four miles south of the city of Carmel-by-the-Sea and a quarter-mile below Point Lobos State Natural Reserve. It is among the lower priced properties in this exclusive area, with ocean views from the second floor. The Highlands Inn, a historic hotel that is now owned by Hyatt and includes the newly created California Market at Pacific’s Edge restaurant, is five minutes west on foot.
Size: 1,668 square feet
Price per square foot: $836
Indoors: The home has been remodeled within the last decade, with a new roof, updated kitchen appliances and surfaces and new bathroom fixtures. The wood siding on the living room walls is painted silvery gray, and the wood ceiling is whitewashed; they contrast with the warm-colored hardwood floors laid during the most recent renovation. The wood-burning living room fireplace has a white-painted brick surround and hearth.
The kitchen countertops are granite, and appliances include a Viking range and hood. A windowed corner serves as a breakfast nook, next to a door opening to the driveway and front yard.
The downstairs bedroom has whitewashed walls; the bathroom has surfaces of stone tile and granite and a combined tub and shower.
Upstairs is a master with a walk-in closet and space for a chaise longue and a writing table. The en suite master bathroom has a granite tile shower and hammered-copper basin. There is also an A-shaped, timber-clad guest room on this floor, served by the downstairs bathroom.
Outdoor space: The fenced quarter-acre lot includes a covered patio, accessible from the living room, with a stone wood-burning fireplace and a fountain. The attached two-bay garage is unusually large for the neighborhood.
Taxes: $15,345 (estimated)
Contact: Pat Ward, Sotheby’s International Realty, 831-236-2268; sothebyshomes.com