Impeachment Trial, Coronavirus, Australian Open: Your Friday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
House impeachment managers are expected to wrap up their opening statements today, before yielding the floor to President Trump’s defense team, which is scheduled to begin its presentation on Saturday. (Senate rules dictate a six-day schedule during impeachment proceedings.)
Here’s what to expect when the trial resumes around 1 p.m. Eastern.
On Thursday, the Democrats tried to undercut Mr. Trump’s defense, arguing that his pressure campaign on Ukraine was not merely an effort to root out corruption but an abuse of power that warranted his removal. They also took a calculated risk by discussing the targets of Mr. Trump’s efforts: Joe Biden and his son, Hunter Biden.
News analysis: Prevented so far from presenting witnesses, the managers have focused on using the president’s own words against him, a strategy that “seeks to capitalize on Mr. Trump’s astonishingly unfiltered approach,” our chief White House correspondent writes.
Related: For Joe Biden, questions about his son represent a potential vulnerability in his presidential campaign and a fine line to navigate.
Closer look: Photos of the Senate chamber are limited, so we’ve produced a three-dimensional diagram.
Perspective: In our Opinion section, legal experts examined the strongest and weakest points of Mr. Trump’s defense.
The authorities today extended restrictions to 12 cities near Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak of a deadly coronavirus, doubling the number of cities on lockdown.
They also raised the death toll to 26, including two people who died hundreds of miles from Wuhan. Here are the latest updates and maps of the virus’s spread.
Related: Health officials said they were examining whether a Texas A&M University student could be the second known case of the virus in the U.S.
Yesterday: The World Health Organization said it was too early to declare an international health emergency, in part because there are so far relatively few cases outside China.
Another angle: The cheap, disposable masks that the Chinese authorities have promoted may help prevent the spread of infections, but there’s little evidence on their effectiveness outside health care settings, experts say.
Watch: Video from Wuhan, population 11 million, shows a city on edge.
Eric Adams, the Brooklyn borough president and a possible candidate for mayor of New York, prompted a fierce debate this week when he said that newcomers to the city were “hijacking” apartments from longtime residents.
“Go back to Iowa,” Mr. Adams, who was born in Brooklyn, said on Monday. “You go back to Ohio. New York City belongs to the people that was here and made New York City what it is.”
He later walked back his comments, but they speak to “the broader problem of the invasion narrative in American politics and social thought,” our columnist writes.
Another angle: Andy Byford, the New York City subway chief who earned praise (and a nickname, “Train Daddy”) for improving the antiquated transit system, resigned on Thursday. He had increasingly clashed with Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who has final say over the subway.
F.B.I. agents spent years trying to understand Saudi Arabia’s connections to the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Now a joint investigation by The Times Magazine and ProPublica explores what some agents discovered: a series of missed opportunities by the agency to resolve questions about the link to one of Washington’s closest allies.
Middle East peace plan: President Trump said he would soon release his long-awaited peace plan and invited Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and his chief rival, Benny Gantz, to the White House next week to discuss it. Palestinian officials reiterated that they would treat any American proposal as dead on arrival.
“Jungle Prince of Delhi” update: After publishing an investigation last year about a reclusive family in India, The Times received tips from readers that helped unearth more information.
Snapshot: Above, part of the excavation of Herculaneum, an ancient Roman city that was destroyed in 79 A.D. in the eruption of Mount Vesuvius, which also buried Pompeii. Two studies published on Thursday offered new details about the victims.
In memoriam: Jim Lehrer, a PBS newsman for 36 years, gave viewers an alternative to network evening news programs, with in-depth interviews and news analysis. He died on Thursday at 85.
Australian Open results: Coco Gauff, 15, upset the reigning champion, Naomi Osaka, today, and Serena Williams was ousted by the 27th-seeded Wang Qiang of China.
News quiz: Did you follow the headlines this week? Test yourself.
Modern Love: This week’s column is by a woman whose father advised her, “Never count on a man.”
Late-night comedy: Trevor Noah said, “If you didn’t want to be bored at work, you shouldn’t have become a senator, O.K.? You should have stuck with racecar driving, Mitch McConnell.”
What we’re reading: This profile of Lizzo in Rolling Stone “reveals how hard the Grammy-nominated singer fought to become a new kind of superstar,” writes Remy Tumin of the Briefings team.
Cook: Pasta alla vodka is a quick, flavorful dish that leaves enough time to make a salad.
Watch: “The Gentlemen,” from the British director Guy Ritchie, features villains and supervillains, crime and punishment, winks and splatter-happy schtick, our film critic writes.
Read: A collection of reviews and essays by the New Yorker critic James Wood is among 12 books we recommend this week.
Smarter Living: Our Climate Fwd: newsletter usually offers a weekly tip on something you can do for the environment, but this week it’s looking at the bigger picture.
Of the many rules that govern the Senate impeachment trial of President Trump, there is none more incongruous than the one covering what food and drink is allowed on the floor during the proceedings: water, milk and candy. That’s it.
The candy is thanks to the “candy desk,” a relic now assigned to Senator Patrick Toomey of Pennsylvania. It’s on the Republican side of the chamber, in the back row on the aisle.
The tradition of the candy desk started in 1965 with Senator George Murphy, a sweet-toothed California Republican, and in recent years it has been controlled by lawmakers from Pennsylvania, which has the country’s biggest confectionery industry. The desk is currently stocked with Hershey bars with almonds, Rolo caramels, Milky Ways, 3 Musketeers bars, Palmer Peanut Butter Cups and Goldenberg’s Peanut Chews.
As for beverages, only water is permitted — both still and sparkling — though a legislative rule book does refer to a lawmaker who was permitted to ask for a glass of milk in 1966. Even though the proceedings have so far made for some very long days, coffee is not allowed.