‘Cheer’: What to Read and Listen to After Seeing This Netflix Hit
Are you going to make mat? Who’s your Jerry? Are you more of a top girl or a tumbler?
If you know how to answer any or all of these questions, chances are your brain has recently been taken over by “Cheer,” the six-part docu-series from Netflix about a community college’s competitive cheerleading squad, which has become one of the most talked-about shows so far this year.
Created by the team that was behind “Last Chance U,” the show follows the cheer squad of Navarro College in Texas as it prepares obsessively for the only performance that matters: the annual collegiate cheerleading competition in Daytona Beach, Fla. Thanks to Monica Aldama, the head coach, Navarro is known to be the best college team in the country, but heavy are the heads that wear the crowns, and we see the cheerleaders suffer injuries and emotional breakdowns as competition day gets closer.
Here are some of the most interesting pieces “Cheer” has inspired, from around the web.
“Cheer” Is Built on a Pyramid of Broken Bodies [The Atlantic]
Amanda Mull places “Cheer” in the wider context of college sports. “The series tells one of the oldest, darkest stories in American sports — of athletes with no pay and little support breaking their bodies again and again, all for the greater glory of an authority figure they dare not question,” she writes in The Atlantic. In most college sports, she notes, “the National Collegiate Athletic Association standardizes safety measures and regulates risks, but it doesn’t recognize cheerleading as a varsity sport; cheer’s separate governing body, the National Cheerleaders Association, doesn’t have quite so many safety rules.”
How “Cheer’s” Superstar Coach, Monica, Gets It Done [The Cut]
Maybe you were inspired, rather than disturbed, by Aldama’s determination to get the trophy? The Cut interviewed her for their “How I Get It Done” column, where she shared her daily routine, how she ended up in cheerleading instead of on Wall Street, and how her political views are “some of the very conservative, some very liberal.” She also answers some of the criticism around her pushing a male cheerleader to practice with a back injury.
The Pathos of “Cheer” and the Wild Deceptions of Cheerleading [The New Yorker]
“In cheerleading, as in gymnastics, the upper difficulty level is being pushed higher at a thrilling and alarming rate,” writes Jia Tolentino in The New Yorker. “Much of what the Navarro cheerleaders do onscreen was barred from competition, if not physically impossible, when I was cheering at a Texas high school, in the early two-thousands.” She notes that cheerleaders have to be shiny and smiling, no matter the difficulty or pain of their routines.
Welcome to TV’s Cheer-ocracy [Vulture]
If you’re wondering what to watch after “Cheer,” consider USA’s “Dare Me,” a soapy noir show centered on a high school cheerleading squad. For Vulture, Jen Chaney says that the two shows are very different, but both use cheerleading to “convey the same message, just in different contexts: As soon as you can’t rely on the people around you to provide support, everything in your world very well may crumble to the ground.”
Tumbling Into “Cheer” and “Dare Me” [NPR Podcast]
On this episode of NPR’s “Pop Culture Happy Hour,” the conversation also focuses on “Cheer” and “Dare Me.” Linda Holmes describes “Cheer” as a show “I find quite inspiring at times, and also unbelievably bleak.” Together with Barrie Hardymon and Christina Tucker, Holmes breaks down why Aldama has been such a divisive character, and wonders if getting the win is always the best thing for the kid. The trio also dig into the team’s racial dynamics — not investigated by the show — including the fact that the female cheerleaders are white, while a lot of the male cheerleaders are black. What does Aldama mean when she says some cheerleaders just have the “look”?
On the Mat We’re Briefly Perfect: On Netflix’s “Cheer” [LA Review of Books]
Arielle Zibrak dives into how strangely time operates in the show, from the time cards noting how long we have until the competition in Daytona Beach to the mind-boggling fact that “A cheer routine is two minutes and fifteen seconds long. The team spends an entire season rehearsing it. It is only performed in competition once at Daytona.” What does it mean to work so hard for just a couple of minutes? “The fantasy of that 2:15 is so very seductive: to be briefly perfect, to be completely seen and adored,” she writes.
Netflix Made Them Reality Stars. Now the Team From “Cheer” Wonders What’s Next [LA Times]
Since the show landed on Netflix last month,  the athletes have been hitting the talk show circuit, gaining millions of followers on Instagram and trying to find time to practice. Meredith Blake from The Los Angeles Times catches up with Aldama and the athletes at the center of the show to see how they’re adapting to life post-viral fame. She also talks to the show’s creator, Greg Whiteley, about how he developed its narrative, and discovered stories in the athletes’ pasts that he never expected.