11 New Books We Recommend This Week
How should one live? It’s a brief, potent and timeless question, explored in a few of this week’s recommended books. In her debut memoir, “Uncanny Valley,” Anna Wiener recounts leaving her low-paying publishing job for Silicon Valley, and the ensuing optimism and disenchantment she experienced. In the darkly comic novel “The Heap,” Sean Adams explores what happens to survivors after a skyscraping utopia collapses. Another collapse — this time of a steeple — occurs in Sylvia Townsend Warner’s “The Corner That Held Them,” a novel that immerses readers in the daily life of a 14th-century English convent.
On the nonfiction side of this week’s other choices, we find a book about Donald Trump’s relationship to the American military; an opinionated look at recent developments in linguistics; and the story of a Jewish woman who sold French books in 1930s Germany at great risk to herself. In fiction, two close cousins in Armenia end up following very different paths; a woman looks back on her life just after she’s been murdered (yes, after); surreal stories from a Uruguayan master of the form; a near-future tale of cat-loving artificial intelligence; and an Italian thriller set just after World War II.
John Williams
Daily Books Editor and Staff Writer
UNCANNY VALLEY: A Memoir, by Anna Wiener. (MCD/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.) At 25, Wiener left a low-paying publishing job and wound up in San Francisco, in the hypercompetitive, male-dominated, morally obtuse world of tech start-ups. Her splendid memoir is a vital reckoning with an industry awash in self-delusion. “Wiener’s storytelling mode is keen and dry, her sentences spare — perfectly suited to let a steady thrum of dread emerge,” our critic Jennifer Szalai writes.
DON’T BELIEVE A WORD: The Surprising Truth About Language, by David Shariatmadari. (Norton, $27.95.) This book, by a writer and editor at The Guardian, is a brisk and friendly introduction to linguistics, and a synthesis of the field’s recent discoveries. It “delves into the riddles of language: the opacities, ambushes, dead ends, sudden ecstasies,” our critic Parul Sehgal writes, and takes “decisive aim at some well-chosen foes. Enemy Number One: The pedant or self-styled grammar snob.”
THE GIMMICKS, by Chris McCormick. (Harper, $27.99.) McCormick’s novel begins in the early 1970s, nearly 60 years after the Armenian genocide conducted by the Ottoman Empire. The story follows two cousins in Soviet Armenia who consider themselves brothers: Ruben Petrosian, a promising backgammon player obsessed with politics, and Avo Gregoryan, a large, sweet teenager who eventually becomes a professional wrestler in the United States. “A thumbnail sketch inevitably makes this novel sound overcrowded and jumbled,” our reviewer John Williams writes, “but McCormick keeps things admirably nimble, moving the stories forward while shuttling back and forth through time and across perspectives.”
THE HEAP, by Sean Adams. (Morrow/HarperCollins, $26.99.) “The Heap” is about a pile of trash that used to be a tower. There is easy symbolism to be had in that contrast, but Adams is thankfully less interested in allegory than in cutting satire. What he’s really after, in this darkly comic narrative about the search for the collapse’s lone survivor, is an exploration of communal life. “The novel’s concern is not the instinct to form groups, but what people do within them,” Wil Medearis writes in his review. “The suggestion is of a lingering quality to human nature. Whether clustered in a vertical utopia or scavenging its collapse, people, for better or for worse — and in ‘The Heap’ it is frequently the latter — will always act like people.”
TRUMP AND HIS GENERALS: The Cost of Chaos, by Peter Bergen. (Penguin Press, $30.) As Bergen, the author of several books on national security, shows, Donald Trump’s relationship to the American military is fraught because he has no understanding of the martial virtues and seems to assume that soldiering is simply a matter of violence, even uncaged brutality. “It took a level-headed observer of no particular insight or special knowledge to understand that Donald Trump’s deficiencies of character, outlook and experience made him unfit for office,” Eliot A. Cohen writes in his review. “But ‘Trump and His Generals’ raises … important questions about the outlandish and sordid tale.”
10 MINUTES 38 SECONDS IN THIS STRANGE WORLD, by Elif Shafak. (Bloomsbury, $27.) At the opening of this atmospheric novel by Shafak, a prolific British-Turkish writer, the narrator, a prostitute, has been murdered and left in an Istanbul rubbish bin. In the minutes before her brain ceases to function, she recalls her eventful life in vivid, sensuous detail. “Who was she? Who’s killed her? Who will remember her after she’s gone? What will be the consequences of this brutality?” our reviewer, Julia Phillips, writes. “These are the questions the book takes up, with plenty of room for grief, humor and love in between.”
A DREAM COME TRUE: The Collected Stories of Juan Carlos Onetti. Translated by Katherine Silver. (Archipelago, paper, $26.) Admired by Gabriel García Márquez and Mario Vargas Llosa, Onetti, a Uruguayan who fled his country’s repressive regime in the 1970s, ushered Spanish-language fiction into the modern era. His surreal stories capture the anguish and thwarted dreams of people under dictatorship. “Listlessness is his great theme,” Ratik Asokan writes, reviewing the book, “and it gives his stories their unusual shape. Rather than dramatize events, Onetti shows people recalling and reflecting on the nonevents of their lives, or, more usually, the lives of others, trying to give them meaning and glamour.”
THE CORNER THAT HELD THEM, by Sylvia Townsend Warner. (New York Review Books Classics, paper, $16.95.) The Black Death arrives, and the steeple collapses, but little else happens in this novel’s 14th-century English convent. With wit and deceptively spare prose, Warner immerses the reader in the ebb and flow of a small, fractious community. “Warner’s style is delicate and arch, consisting of a gentle skewering of religious ladies that recalls Barbara Pym,” writes our reviewer, Josephine Livingstone. “Though she teeters on the edge of satire, she lands instead (like Pym or Evelyn Waugh) on poignancy. … Beneath the surface of Warner’s humor is a quiet but powerful meditation on what it means to be mortal.”
A BOOKSHOP IN BERLIN: The Rediscovered Memoir of One Woman’s Harrowing Escape From the Nazis, by Françoise Frenkel. Translated by Stephanie Smee. (Atria, $26.) A Jewish woman born in Poland describes a life devoted to French literature, her increasingly dangerous business selling French books in 1930s Germany and her desperate flight across occupied France. “The question of whether and how she will survive drives Frenkel’s account,” Lauren Elkin writes in her review. “But the misadventures of her personal belongings provide a subtle yet humanizing strand of the narrative, as does the documentary material provided at the end of the book.”
CATFISHING ON CATNET, by Naomi Kritzer. (Tor Teen, $17.99.) In this tender, funny, near-future Y.A. thriller, a 17-year-old finds solace in an online chat community called “Catnet” that’s run by cat-loving artificial intelligence. Our science-fiction and fantasy columnist, Amal El-Mohtar, calls it “a pure delight and a late addition to my top books of the year”: “This book is perfect. From the believable teenage voices to the shockingly effective thriller plot, it swings effortlessly from charming humor to visceral terror, grounding it all in beautiful friendships, budding romance and radical acceptance.”
THE BISHOP’S BEDROOM, by Piero Chiara. Translated by Jill Foulston. (New Vessel, paper, $15.95.) An existential Italian thriller that explores a dangerous game of deception in the years just after World War II. Set in and around Lake Maggiore, it depicts a deadly romantic triangulation. “The ‘solution’ of a wealthy woman’s murder isn’t the main issue,” Scott Bradfield writes in his review; “instead, Chiara explores the disaffected, essentially corrupt world that allows her murder to happen, a world in which complacent, middle-class men and women are returning to their prosperous lives after the (to them) superficial interruption of Mussolini. … This is a strong, well-written and weirdly seductive little novel.”