Review: ‘The Outsider’ Takes a Stephen King Novel and Makes It Darker
“The Outsider” is not generally considered to be really top-flight Stephen King. If you look up rankings of his novels, it tends to come in around the midpoint at best and often much lower. Some people are turned off by the way it segues from police procedural mystery to supernatural skirmish. Others think the villain just isn’t scary enough.
Presumably the writer Richard Price and the actor and producer Jason Bateman, two of the main forces behind the 10-episode adaptation of “The Outsider” that begins Sunday on HBO, liked the book. You have to wonder, though. Based on the first six episodes, they’ve gloomed it up and slowed it down, keeping much of the basic story but making something radically different in tone and atmosphere. It’s “The Outsider” dipped in noir sauce and coated in HBO-prestige bread crumbs.
Is it an improvement? Having just read the book, I missed King’s energy and earnestness, and most of all his sense of relentless forward motion. In HBO’s “Outsider” the camera slowly glides, or creeps, or just sits still while actors try out their hard or perplexed or grieving stares. It doubles down on a kind of blue-tinged moodiness that’s a popular mode in television mystery these days, from “The Sinner” on USA to Price’s “The Night Of” for HBO. (Bateman directed the first two episodes.) It takes King’s spooky, jokey, thinly characterized plot machine and turns it into a psychological workout.
If that lines up with your taste, “The Outsider” will be perfectly watchable and probably even enjoyable. The cast, led by Ben Mendelsohn, Cynthia Erivo, Mare Winningham and Julianne Nicholson, is excellent. And Price — he wrote a majority of the episodes, with another eminent crime novelist, Dennis Lehane, contributing a few more — keeps the mystery legible and credible (while negotiating a change of venue to Georgia from Oklahoma). Just settle in for a very slow boil.
Show and book both begin with the discovery of the body of an 11-year-old boy, horrifically murdered, and move directly to the arrest of a solid local citizen, Terry Maitland (Bateman), while he’s coaching a youth baseball game. The detective in charge, Ralph Anderson (Mendelsohn), arrests Maitland quickly and publicly because of the crime’s brutality but primarily because the evidence against him — fingerprints, multiple witnesses, surveillance footage — is so overwhelming.
But as quickly as it came together, the case begins to fall apart. There’s equally compelling evidence that Maitland was at a teacher’s conference in another town when the murder was committed. How could he have been in two places at once? And is the answer connected to the eerie premonitions and visitations that begin to afflict people connected to the case, including the wives of Anderson and Maitland (Winningham and Nicholson)?
It is, of course, and part of the fun of the book is the subversive way in which King constructs a classic mystery scenario, studded with references to Poe and Robert Ludlum, and then doesn’t bother to solve it in the usual style. The case of Terry Maitland seems impossible, and it is — unless you accept a paranormal explanation (and a classic Stephen King type of story), which Anderson, a dogmatic realist, isn’t at first prepared to do.
The literary allusions have been dropped in the series, understandably, but the novel holds a greater challenge for adapters. In service of the bifurcated plot, and indulging his habit of shuffling people from book to book, King revives an old character — the private investigator Holly Gibney (Erivo), from “Mr. Mercedes” — and drops her in halfway through “The Outsider,” to function as Anderson’s tough-love guide to the world of storybook predators.
The awkward but resolute Gibney is the best thing about “The Outsider,” and Price and company know it — they’ve smushed the first half of the book into the first couple of episodes of the series so that they can introduce her earlier, and from there the series is in large part a showcase for Erivo, the star of “Harriet” and the coming season of “Genius” devoted to Aretha Franklin.
Erivo capably embodies Gibney’s under-the-surface compassion and strength, but her performance is hemmed in by the show’s decision to amp up the character’s idiosyncrasies — this Gibney is practically a rain-woman savant, and Erivo’s attempts to give that some nuance can just end up looking dull. King’s Gibney drew an excitement and satisfaction from her investigative work that Price’s character doesn’t seem to feel.
And that tweak is just one of many changes, small and large, that push the show in dark and heavy directions. A suicide, glancingly referred to in the book, is now onscreen and graphic. The amount of time spent in a dank strip club has gone way up. Most tellingly, Anderson’s son, alive in the book, is now dead, generating additional stress and marital discord.
There may be a Jason Bateman effect at work here. Noirish gloom seems to follow him around: The first season of Netflix’s “Ozark” (the only one I’ve seen) took material that wanted to be dark comedy and squeezed much of the fun out of it, though Laura Linney, as the wife of Bateman’s antihero, worked heroically to counteract that. “The Outsider” takes an entertaining and propulsive, if routine, read and renders it with style and savvy but not much of a pulse. Watch the show and — spoiler alert! — you may find that that’s kind of what the killer does, too.