The T List: Five Things We Recommend This Week
Welcome to the T List, a newsletter from the editors of T Magazine. Each week, we’re sharing things we’re eating, wearing, listening to or coveting now. Sign up here to find us in your inbox every Wednesday. You can always reach us at tlist@nytimes.com.
In 2017, Jenny Kaplan, Chris Corrado and Taisha Coombs — the founders of the Brooklyn-based creative agency An Aesthetic Pursuit — launched Pieces, a line of graphic furniture and rugs that has become instantly recognizable for its bold use of color. This month, in lieu of filling a traditional showroom, the trio will open a shoppable vacation property in Kennebunk, Maine, in which everything in the circa 1878 house — from Pieces’ new Wavy Rug to the lilac Vitra sofa to the Great Jones Cookware and Le Labo candles — will be available for purchase on the Pieces website. Kaplan and Corrado, who are married, are from Southern Maine and felt that the quintessential New England coastal community of Kennebunk would be a perfect place for potential customers to get up close and personal with their designs. “It just made the most sense to us,” Kaplan told me. “What better way to get to know someone than to spend a little time in their home?” Book a stay and shop the home at pieceshomes.com.
Years before the Danish-Icelandic artist Olafur Eliasson or the British sculptor Antony Gormley filled spaces with light and fog, the Brussels-based artist Ann Veronica Janssens invited visitors of Berlin’s Neue Nationalgalerie into a pavilion containing thick rainbow-tinted mist — “Blue, Red, and Yellow” (2001) — making her case for art as experience rather than object. I’ve often wondered why she isn’t more famous, but her coming solo show at Denmark’s celebrated Louisiana Museum of Modern Art might be her star turn. Among the featured works in an exhibition that traces Janssen’s output from the 1990s to the present: a reprisal of “Blue, Red, and Yellow,” the eight-foot-tall iridescent glass panels she calls magic mirrors, her chrome bicycles with reflective wheels that showgoers can ride and a tiny crystal prism she has embedded in one of the museum’s windows. And the venue couldn’t be more perfect: The Louisiana — a glass-walled midcentury building on the Oresund Sound 24 miles north of Copenhagen — is one of the most otherworldly artistic institutions in Europe. “Hot Pink Turquoise” is on view from Jan. 23 to May 17 at the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Gl Strandvej 13, 3050, Humlebaek, Denmark, louisiana.dk.
The turn of another new year means renewed attempts at dieting, stopping bad habits and getting my life in order. But I’ll never give up sweets, and I ditched cigarettes months ago, so that leaves me with some good old-fashioned organization, which, for me, will be facilitated by the New York-based accessories line Delaroq. Founded in November 2018 by Jennifer Lyu — a veteran of Louis Vuitton, Prada and 3.1 Phillip Lim — Delaroq emphasizes simplicity, an approach that is embodied in both Lyu’s sustainable upcycling practices (she works with excess materials) and the pieces’ thoughtful design; each handbag, including the just-released cross-body pouch and the chain-handle clutch, contains an expandable accordion gusset with three labeled compartments, so I’ll always be able to find my lip balm, MetroCard and glasses. Here’s to a stylish start to a daunting resolution. From $225, delaroq.com.
During the first year of Donald Trump’s presidency alone, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) took 119 legal actions to protect the rights of American citizens. But if the nonprofit organization has seemed especially vital since 2017, it has a far longer history of defending civic freedoms. In the new book “Fight of the Century,” edited by the writers Ayelet Waldman and Michael Chabon, 40 authors share essays in response to landmark cases from the ACLU’s 100-year history. The novelist Yaa Gyasi tackles Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954), a case in which the ACLU acted as amicus curiae, while the writer Lauren Groff reflects on Roe v. Wade (1973). “In this time of crisis, it is critically important to highlight the work of one of the country’s most devoted and active civil rights organizations,” Ayelet told me. Her selection? The 1975 case O’Connor v. Donaldson (“because I have a mental illness and am grateful to the ACLU for working so diligently to protect our rights, too,” she explained). Chabon, meanwhile, chose the organization’s clever campaign, in 1933, to remove the nationwide ban on James Joyce’s “Ulysses.” $27, simonandschuster.com.
The best grilled chicken I’ve had was in Tokyo, hardly surprising given Japan’s yakitori tradition, wherein most parts of the bird — thigh, neck, gizzard! — and vegetables like mushrooms and zucchini are cooked on skewers over binchotan charcoal. But the second-best grilled chicken I’ve had was in New York, at the recently opened Torien in NoHo. The restaurant is the American debut for the legendary master Yoshiteru Ikegawa, whose Tokyo spot Torishiki is all but impossible to book. He’ll be visiting Torien — little more than a 16-seat counter — twice a year, but it’s run nightly by his disciple, Yoshiteru Maekawa, who has the same savoir-faire with char, crunch, sinew, succulent meat and charcoal (a rarefied sort, imported from Kishu, Japan) that makes good yakitori so transcendent. The 13-course omakase ($150) changes nightly; halfway through, you will be asked if you want to finish the meal by adding a rice or ramen dish. Get the soupy one: It’s broth as near-religious experience, the clarity of chicken — and life, perhaps — revealed with each fleeting spoonful. torien-nyc.com.