A ‘Disappointed’ Steve Cohen Walks Away From Mets Purchase
For two months, many Mets fans have looked forward to seeing their beloved team under new ownership. On Thursday night, however, Steve Cohen, the billionaire hedge fund manager who was negotiating to buy the team, confirmed the deal was dead.
“I’m very disappointed we couldn’t work out a deal,” Cohen said in a statement. He added, “I gave it my best shot.”
Sterling Partners, the entity that owns the Mets, called the transaction “highly complicated” and said in a statement that it became clear the deal “would have been too difficult to execute.”
Sterling said it now “intends now to pursue a new transaction.”
Cohen had been negotiating with the Wilpon family, which controls the Mets through Sterling Partners, since the middle of last year. The Mets and Cohen announced in December they were negotiating a deal in which Cohen, who currently has an 8 percent stake in the team,  would become the majority owner. The deal included an unusual provision that allowed Fred Wilpon, the managing owner of the Mets, and his son Jeff, the team’s chief operating officer, to remain in their roles for five years after the completion of the sale.
It was that provision that largely resulted in the talks falling apart, according to four people who were familiar with the discussions and who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to comment publicly. Cohen believed the Wilpons would play largely ceremonial roles, while the Wilpons wanted to continue to be active in the operation of the franchise, according to the people.
Reacting to multiple reports that blamed the Wilpons for the failing negotiations, Major League Baseball Commissioner Rob Manfred pushed back earlier on Thursday.
“Based on conversations with the buyer and seller on an ongoing basis,” Manfred said at an owners’ meeting in Orlando, Fla., “the assertion that the transaction fell apart because of something that the Wilpons did is completely and utterly unfair.”
The Wilpons and the owners of each baseball team are among Manfred’s 30 bosses. Manfred has a long history with the Wilpon family. He was part of the M.L.B. hierarchy when his predecessor, Bud Selig, helped the Wilpons remain in control of the team by having the league loan them money during the crippling scandal of the financier Bernard Madoff, with whom the Wilpons had invested hundreds of millions of dollars.
With a deal involving Cohen now off the table, the question remains of who will own the Mets down the road.
Cohen wasn’t the only potential buyer the Wilpons talked to during the second half of 2019, but he emerged as the favorite because of his apparent willingness to agree to the unique provision, according to two of the people familiar with the process.
In some ways, the floor price for the Mets has been set. Anyone willing to buy a majority stake at a valuation of around $2.5 billion — the amount Cohen and the Wilpons were negotiating over — and allow Fred and Jeff Wilpon to remain in their roles for a number of years can come forward.
The identities of Fred and his eldest son, Jeff, are closely tied to the Mets. They are intimately involved with all of the team’s operations, so few were surprised they wanted to maintain some level of control over the franchise despite selling a majority stake.
As the Mets return to the market, the conditions that caused the Wilpons to agree to sell the team in the first place endure.
The potential sale to Cohen, according to interviews with a dozen people who are directly involved with the Mets and the Wilpon family, was driven by family members who are wary of having Jeff Wilpon in charge of such a valuable asset as his father and uncle step back from the franchise. They would rather take the huge profit from a sale. Fred Wilpon is 83 and his brother-in-law Saul Katz, who is also involved with the Mets, is 80.
Whether a deep-pocketed buyer who would accede to the Wilpons’ terms with Cohen exists or whether someone would end up paying more than Cohen offered to gain immediate control remains to be seen. The sale talks broke down over the exact issue that most buyers wouldn’t even consider entertaining: There are not many willing to spend billions for a franchise while letting other people run it for five years.
The Wilpon family became co-owners of the Mets in 1986, and became controlling owners in 2002. While the team has reached the World Series twice under their stewardship, they have been largely unsuccessful, qualifying for the playoffs just six times in the past 33 seasons.
For years Mets fans have clamored for a sale, frustrated that the team plays in the country’s largest market yet often has a payroll more befitting a mid-market club. As spring training approaches — some players have already reported to the team’s facility in Port St. Lucie, Fla. — the Mets have the league’s eighth highest payroll, according to Spotrac. In 2019 the team’s opening-day payroll of nearly $155 million was the 10th largest in M.L.B. — the first time the Mets had been in the top 10 since 2011.
Not too long ago, it was easy to imagine the Mets emerging from spring training with a newfound sense of hope and optimism. They were going to be led by a new manager, Carlos Beltran, a well-liked and respected former player. They would have a new owner, Cohen, who as one of the richest men in America could easily increase payroll while covering the team’s financial shortfalls, which resulted in the team’s losing $50 million last season, according to a person familiar with the team’s finances.
Fans seemed largely unconcerned by Cohen’s brushes with the law in his investment business, including his agreement to pay a $1.2 billion fine in 2013 to to settle charges related to insider trading at his firm.
Instead, the franchise is now in turmoil. Beltran was fired last month, before managing a single game, after he was the only player personally named in M.L.B.’s blistering report on the Astros’ sign-stealing scandal. And as a new sales process begins, the Mets will continue to be dogged by ownership uncertainty.
Not everyone is concerned. Asked about the questions surrounding the team’s management, General Manager Brodie Van Wagenen said late last month that it was business as usual for the franchise.
“Our goals are to win now and win in the future,” Van Wagenen said at a Mets town hall meeting in January. “We’ve been very, very direct and we haven’t shied away from that, from that mission statement and we won’t as we go forward. The day-to-day operations of our club have been consistent in which I started, I would anticipate that being the same going forward.”