Picturing Chaos at the Iowa Caucuses
DES MOINES — Every four years the Iowa caucuses are supposed to deliver the first clear signal of which candidates are actually resonating with voters. That didn’t happen on Monday.
Struggles with a new system of reporting various degrees of victory from each precinct led to the state of suspended animation the 2020 Democrats find themselves in now.
Photographers for The New York Times were scattered across caucus sites and campaign parties in Iowa as it became clear that a winner would not be declared — at least not Monday night.
The evening began like normal, with community buildings like schools and senior centers transforming into caucus precincts. Signs were posted for supporters of each candidate to gather and be counted at Bryant Elementary School in Dubuque.
In Des Moines, signs were hung outside Roosevelt High School and posters were set up at the South Side Senior Center.
People waited to be checked in at the senior center.
As caucusgoers clustered with their preferred candidates, it became clear that some would not be viable.
Sections for Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, and Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii at the Drake University Fieldhouse in Des Moines were empty during the first alignment of caucusgoers.
People raised the first preference card in support of former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., during a caucus at Johnston Middle School in a suburb of Des Moines.
At the senior center, a supporter of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont pleaded with a backer of Andrew Yang, the former tech entrepreneur, to join her group once Mr. Yang was deemed not viable.
At a Drake University site, volunteers started calculating the number of caucusgoers.
Precinct captains wrangled their supporters at Drake University.
Hours went by and no results were reported. Supporters of Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota took in the news at a caucus night party in Des Moines.
People at Mr. Sanders’s party in Des Moines waited for results to arrive.
The reality of a long night with possibly no results reported started to set in at a party in Des Moines for former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
In the hours between 10 p.m. and midnight Central time, candidates and their supporters began to settle into the reality that a result was not coming any time soon.
They cheered as their candidates spoke of what victory they could, but without the clarity of election results.
The set was torn down at Mr. Biden’s party after he spoke.
The candidates now move on to New Hampshire, whose primary on Feb. 11 more closely resembles much of the country’s nominating contests.
Senator Elizabeth Warren and several other candidates flew directly from Des Moines to Manchester, N.H., overnight. They have begun the next stretch of campaigning, while leaving the results of the first contest unknown.