PBS’s Sexy ‘Sanditon’ Finishes What Jane Austen Started
BRISTOL, England — Three hundred candles reflecting off gold walls cast a rich, hazy glow upon the dancers, who squealed with excitement as they changed partners in a boisterous round. To the side, a beautiful young woman locked eyes with a tall, handsome man. But before he could approach her, another suitor stepped in and asked, “May I have the pleasure?”
As she extended her hand, he walked into a tall light, ruining the take and sending the cast into hysterics. “I don’t think Jane Austen wrote it like that,” a cameraman said.
In fact, although the balls, courtship, love and obstacles will feel familiar to Janeites the world over, there isn’t much of “Sanditon,” a new eight-part Austen adaptation arriving Sunday on PBS’s “Masterpiece,” that was taken directly from the author’s writings. “Sanditon,” which was filmed here last June and premiered in Britain in August, is based on Austen’s final, unfinished work, a book relatively unknown even to fans of her six much-filmed completed novels.
Austen had written only 11 chapters of “Sanditon” and had begun a 12th when, suffering from an unspecified illness, she stopped writing on March 18, 1817. Four months later, she died at age 41, and it was only in 1925 that the story was published in its partial form.
The novel (which Austen originally called “The Brothers”) begins with a carriage accident and the fortuitous rescue of its inhabitants — Mr. and Mrs. Parker — by the kindly Heywood family. Tom Parker (Kris Marshall) turns out to be an entrepreneur, trying to transform the sleepy seaside town of Sanditon into the newest fashionable resort by staking everything he has on building a hotel, houses, shops and assembly rooms for balls, dining and tourists. When the Parkers are well enough to return home, they take the eldest Heywood daughter, Charlotte (Rose Williams), with them.
Once arrived, she meets Tom’s brothers, the dashing Sidney (Theo James) and the hypochondriacal Arthur (Turlough Convery), as well as a variety of Sanditon’s inhabitants, including the rich and doughty Lady Denham (Anne Reid) and an assortment of her impecunious relatives. She also hears of Miss Lambe (Crystal Clarke), a young heiress from the West Indies whose wealth and racial background has sent ripples through the white provincial town.
And that’s about as far as the story goes. Several novelists have attempted continuations (there is even a detective version by Reginald Hill). But this is the first attempt at a cinematic extension of the tale, masterminded by the veteran screenwriter Andrew Davies (“Les Miserables,” “War and Peace”), who has previously adapted four of Austen’s other six novels for television.
“It wasn’t my idea, but I can’t think why I hadn’t thought of it, because I had read it and thought how interesting it was,” Davies said in a telephone interview. “This was the first time Austen set a whole novel at the seaside, and her characters, who are normally very conservative, living very settled lives, are a bunch of guys trying to set up a bells-and-whistles seaside resort.”
Tom and Sidney Parker, Davies pointed out, “are a new type of man, from gentry stock but willing to gamble everything on a risky business venture.” And with Miss Lambe, Jane Austen’s only black major character, “You think, what is she going to do with that?”
What Davies (together with his co-writers, Justin Young and Andrea Gibb) do with it is to give Georgiana Lambe a story line of her own, with a forbidden lover in London, Otis Molyneux (Jyuddah Jaymes), a young black man involved in political activism.
“When I first got the script, my initial expectation was that this would be another black character who is a servant or something,” Clarke said in a telephone interview. “What I got was the exact opposite, a real effort to represent someone in a very difficult situation at the time. Jane Austen was clearly very aware of the slave trade, and the issue isn’t avoided in Andrew’s script.”
“Racism, prejudice, Georgiana’s sense of alienation in Britain — it’s all there,” she added.
Susanne Simpson, the executive producer of “Masterpiece,” said that one of the attractions of “Sanditon,” was that it was “a little different” from the Austen adaptations the series did previously. “It’s the story of self-made men, men who made money from trade, from the West Indies, perhaps indirectly through slavery,” she said. “I think Austen was really reflecting on her time.”
And in addition to entrepreneurship, slavery and racism, there is a lot more nudity and sex than Jane Austen purists might consider seemly. “I wanted to have a bit of fun with it, and not be quite as decorous as when adapting a full novel,” Davies said.
In “Sanditon,” he adds a note of incestuous lust to the relationship between stepsiblings Esther (Charlotte Spencer) and Edward Denham (Jack Fox), and more than a suggestion of the calculating, sexually experienced survivor of abuse underlying the meek exterior of the penniless Clara Brereton (Lily Sacofsky), companion to Lady Denham.
Davies also upgrades Colin Firth’s signature wet-shirted emergence from the lake as Mr. Darcy in his 1995 adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice.” In “Sanditon,” Sidney Parker is surprised by Charlotte as he materializes, entirely naked, from the sea. When he later apologizes for causing her any mortification, she responds tartly. “Why should I be embarrassed?” she says. “I had all my clothes on.”
James (best known for his role as Tobias Eaton in the “Divergent” film trilogy) said that he had grown up watching the Davies’s adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice” and had been drawn to the idea of playing the “Austen antihero-hero.”
“I liked this dislikable character that you soften towards, and with television, you can let that happen slowly,” he said. “I also wanted Sidney to be more dangerous and volatile than other Austen heroes. He is a physical person, with a potential for violence, who drinks and smokes and rabble-rouses, not a period drama type.”
Williams, who plays Charlotte Heywood as an opinionated, independent spirit, said that she felt there was something of Catherine Morland from “Northanger Abbey” in her character, as well as a touch of Elizabeth Bennet from “Pride and Prejudice.” But her central sense of the role came from Davies’s scripts, she said.
“There is a lot of implied sexual energy and humor in Austen,” Williams said. “Andrew kind of pulls it out and makes it visual. Scenes like the men bathing naked are also joyful and heartwarming, and capture the feeling of freedom and elation of being at the seaside, released from normal constraints, in that period.”
At least for men. It was interesting, Williams added, to play a free-spirited woman in an age when women couldn’t sign contracts and any of their own money immediately became their husband’s property upon marriage.
“On the surface, it looks all very arty, hair piled up, pretty, flow-y dresses, but underneath you are wearing a corset,” Williams said. “That underlying physical constraint echoes social constraints that I think Austen was very aware of.”
The fact that a married woman’s money becomes her husband’s property drives two separate narrative strands of “Sanditon” and, controversially, determines an ending that leaves plenty of leeway for a second season. Let’s just say that while the turn of the plot is Austen-like (duty set against desire, obligations versus impulse), it’s the kind of narrative twist that might more commonly come midway through an Austen novel rather than at its end.
“Sanditon” viewers left OUTRAGED,” a Daily Mail headline screeched after the final episode aired on Britain’s ITV. (Don’t read the article if you want to avoid spoilers.) “It’s not a secret that we were hoping to get more than one series,” said Davies. “We are very keen on our main characters and wanted to give them more mileage. But yes, there was rage and frustration on Twitter.”
Olly Blackburn, who directed the first three episodes and extensively researched the Regency period, worked closely with the actors on period manners and mores, and defended Davies’s decision to deviate from Austen conventions.
“What can be a danger with Austen is that you can get slightly awe-struck by the material, and also have seen so much of that material before that there are all sorts of preconceptions in your head,” he said.
But the author’s characters, he added, even those that are just sketched out in the existing chapters of “Sanditon,” are “so vivid and recognizable that you should feel the freedom to take them on.”
“They can stand whatever you do to them,” he continued. “After all, the underlying emotional issues are the same now as they were then.”
Or to put it another way, he said, “the frocks change, but the emotions remain the same.”