New York Braces for Coronavirus: ‘It’s Inevitable’
With isolated cases of the dangerous new coronavirus cropping up in a number of states, public health officials say it is only a matter of time before the virus appears in New York City.
As a result, hospitals have been on the lookout for patients with recent travel involving Wuhan, the Chinese city where the coronavirus is believed to have originated. And they have urged those who recently traveled there — or who have been in contact with someone who has — to quickly seek medical care if they have any respiratory or flulike symptoms.
“It’s inevitable that we will have someone who is positive with coronavirus,” New York City’s health commissioner, Dr. Oxiris Barbot, said Sunday.
Some of the last passengers to arrive at Kennedy International Airport on the last direct flights from Wuhan before they were canceled were quarantining themselves at home. One man told of how he had confined himself to his house in Queens, as friends left special Lunar New Year meals on his doorstep.
So far, state officials have sought testing for nine patients who were deemed potential cases of the new coronavirus, sending samples to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for testing.
Four of those patients were found not to have the virus, and the tests involving the other five are still pending, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said Monday in a statement.
When the first case does arrive, health officials said, that patient may end up in a biocontainment unit in Bellevue Hospital or sent home to ride out the illness in his or her bedroom. That will depend largely on how sick they are, public health officials say.
Some people with the virus, Dr. Barbot said, have limited symptoms: coughing, shortness of breath, a low-grade fever. But in others, the virus can be lethal.
Outside of the city, the state Department of Health has been hosting online seminars about the new coronavirus for medical staff. In particular, health officials have engaged in outreach to university health systems, where international students are likely to seek medical care.
By and large, the message to the public has been one of reassurance. “We are encouraging New Yorkers to go about their everyday lives and suggest practicing everyday precautions that we do through the flu season,” Dr. Barbot said.
But there is considerable anxiety and debate over the proper precautions within the city’s Chinatowns. That has only grown in the past few days as more alarming news has emerged out of Wuhan about the virus’s spread. So far more than 4,500 people have been sickened and more than 100 people have died.
In response, the authorities in China have imposed a lockdown of some 56 million people in cities in Hubei province, of which Wuhan is the capital, though by the time it was in effect some five million people had already traveled from Wuhan, according to Wuhan’s mayor.
Scott Liu, 56, a textile importer who lives in Queens, said he was on the last direct flight from Wuhan to Kennedy Airport before the flights were canceled last week. He and his fellow passengers learned of the city lockdown mid-flight.
He does not think he is sick, but he knows that symptoms take time to appear — the authorities have said the incubation period is up to two weeks, although symptoms seem to usually appear within a week, Dr. Barbot said.
In the meantime, Mr. Liu has confined himself at home alone, even at the start of Lunar New Year.
Instead of going out to visit friends and family or sharing holiday meals, Mr. Liu stood behind his door as friends dropped off traditional Hubei dishes for Lunar New Year on his doorstep — lotus root and pork rib soup, salted fish and dumplings.
Mr. Liu said he did not think he was overreacting, just acting responsibly.
“For us, this is very serious,” he said in Mandarin during a phone interview on Friday.
Mr. Liu was among a few hundred members of the New York Yellow Crane Club who had traveled to Wuhan several weeks ago to celebrate the Lunar New Year with relatives.
As the seriousness of the outbreak became apparent, Mr. Liu, who is the club’s president, and a few others cut short their plans and boarded flights home. Mr. Liu arrived in New York on Wednesday, he said.
As of Monday, Mr. Liu said he had not experienced any symptoms: “So far, so good.”
Last year, the Yellow Crane Club, which has more than 500 members of mainly immigrants from Wuhan and their families, hosted a Lunar New Year celebration at a banquet hall in Flushing, Queens.
This year, Mr. Liu said, “all the events here are canceled. Everybody is in a state of panic.”
For now, Mr. Liu spends his days staring at his phone, reading the news about the virus and messaging friends. His wife is visiting their daughter in Florida. He worries about his 90-year-old mother, who lives alone in Wuhan.
Most of his friends who had recently returned from Wuhan had also put themselves under quarantine. Some were urged by family members to confine themselves to a single bedroom so as to reduce the risk of transmission should they become ill.
“There are friends and families that require family members to quarantine themselves — that force them,” he said.
Dr. Barbot said that those who have recently traveled from Wuhan are not being urged to self-quarantine or avoid large public gatherings.
“We are very clear: We wish New Yorkers a Happy Lunar New Year and we encourage people to spend time with their families and go about their celebration,” Dr. Barbot said.
In recent days, Lin Qiurong, 40, who emigrated from China’s Fujian province in 2002, had been weighing messages from friends, urging each other to avoid large crowds. But on Sunday, Ms. Lin and her three teenage children donned surgical face masks and ventured out to a Lunar New Year parade in Sunset Park, home to Brooklyn’s largest Chinatown.
It’s an event that the community looks forward to every year: Giggling children spray each other with canned silly string while lion dance troupes undulate and swerve to the beat of a pounding drum and clanging cymbals. Traditional New Year’s music blasts from large speakers mounted atop a fleet of passenger vans.
There was still all that. Though as Ms. Lin walked down Eighth Avenue, ahead of the parade, she sized up the crowd, and could not shake the impression that there were fewer spectators lining up than in years past.
“Look around,” Ms. Lin said, speaking in Mandarin, noting that while there were plenty of vendors standing behind tables of confetti cannons and silly string, actual spectators seemed to be in short supply. “It’s much emptier compared to last year,” she said.
Louie Liu, 47, a member of a neighborhood patrol group, said he was not concerned about the virus — noting that it had not yet arrived in New York.
“I believe the Chinese government will be able to keep it under control,” said Mr. Liu, who emigrated from Fujian province in 1992. He added, also in Mandarin, that “New York State and New York City are also focused and prepared.”
New York health officials pointed out that they have a long history of preparing for unfamiliar viruses. As recently as last month, the city’s public hospital system was running drills for how to handle possible Ebola cases. In these drills, individuals claiming Ebola-like symptoms would enter an emergency room, and mention a recent trip to the Democratic Republic of Congo, which is currently contending with the second largest Ebola outbreak on record.
Dr. Barbot said that there is not yet a full understanding of how easily the new coronavirus is transmitted.
“All indications are that it’s not nearly as deadly as SARS virus, but the transmissibility is still to be fully elucidated,” Dr. Barbot said, drawing a comparison to another coronavirus outbreak that nearly two decades ago infected more than 8,000 people and killed nearly 800.