What’s on TV Sunday: ‘Avenue 5’ and ‘9-1-1: Lone Star’
AVENUE 5 10 p.m. on HBO; stream on HBO platforms. Armando Iannucci, the creator of “Veep,” returns to HBO with this new black comedy starring Hugh Laurie. Set 40 years in the future, the show takes place on Avenue 5, a luxury space cruise ship that has taken off for an eight-week journey around Saturn. The experience is exquisite, for a moment. Then the ship’s system malfunctions and sets it off course, leading to delirium onboard. As the fate of the ship remains up in the air, disgruntled passengers demand answers from the captain (Laurie) and his ill-equipped crew. Josh Gad plays the clueless billionaire who owns the ship; Suzy Nakamura is his stern right-hand woman; and Zach Woods is, like his character on “The Office,” essentially useless as the head of customer relations. The 10th season premiere of CURB YOUR ENTHUSIASM follows at 10:30.
26TH ANNUAL SCREEN ACTORS GUILD AWARDS 8 p.m. on TBS and TNT. Members of SAG-AFTRA, the union for professional film and television actors, determine the winners of this annual awards show, which often predicts how the Academy Awards will shape out. Among the film and actor nominees are “Parasite,” for outstanding cast; Adam Driver, for best actor; and Lupita Nyong’o, for best actress. In television, nominees include “Game of Thrones,” for best drama series, and “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel,” for best comedy series.
9-1-1: LONE STAR 10 p.m. on Fox. The creators Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk and Tim Minear join forces again for this new spinoff of the Fox procedural “9-1-1,” about emergency medical workers in Los Angeles. In “Lone Star,” Rob Lowe plays Owen, a (well-groomed) firefighter who was the sole survivor in his fire station after the 9/11 attacks. When a firehouse in Austin loses many people to a tragedy, Owen is called on to rebuild it from scratch and assemble a new team. He works closely with a chief paramedic (Liv Tyler) who warns him not to step on her toes and, before long, he learns things are done very differently in Texas.
VIENNA BLOOD 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). In this new, six-part mystery series, Max (Matthew Beard), a student of Sigmund Freud who studies criminal minds, helps an experienced police detective (Juergen Maurer) solve a string of grisly murders in early-20th-century Vienna.
LIFE, ANIMATED (2016) Stream on Hulu; rent on Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. This Oscar-nominated documentary is adapted from the book by Ron Suskind, whose son Owen, who has autism, suddenly became silent at age 3. He found ways to understand the world and communicate, though, through the dialogue of Disney movies. “Life, Animated” charts Owen’s development — he is an adult during filming — and his relationship with his parents, weaving scenes from Disney classics with talking head interviews and touching home movies.