8 Things to Do With Your Kids in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
ANIMATION FIRST at the French Institute Alliance Française (Feb. 7-10). France has many notable exports, but animation doesn’t usually spring immediately to mind. According to the institute, however, the nation is Europe’s largest producer of this type of film, and this festival, now in its third year, will intrigue both young people — those old enough to read subtitles — and their parents. Highlights include the opening-night feature, “The Bears’ Famous Invasion of Sicily,” an adaptation by Lorenzo Mattotti of a children’s book involving some bear-human conflict (and resolution). An all-ages party will follow. On Saturday, junior cineastes can enjoy Anne-Lise Koehler and Éric Serre’s “Hello World!,” an ecological story whose myriad animals are papier-mâché puppets, and “The Prince’s Voyage,” a hand-drawn chronicle of a monkey’s adventure that will be introduced by its director, Jean-François Laguionie. Sunday brings “Marona’s Fantastic Tale,” about the peripatetic life of a Labrador mix; the film’s director, Anca Damian, will do a post-screening Q. and A. The festival will also offer video games, virtual reality experiences and titles for those hardest-to-please moviegoers, teenagers.
212-355-6160, fiaf.org
BROADWAY PLAYHOUSE: JEANINE TESORI at Merkin Hall (Feb. 9, 11 a.m.). Like many creative endeavors, composing for Broadway has long been dominated by men. On Sunday this series, which introduces children ages 4 to 11 to the authors of classic musicals, will celebrate one of the field’s pioneering women. Although Tesori herself will not attend, young audience members will explore her work: In addition to an abbreviated production of “Shrek: The Musical,” which features songs written for a gruff but good-hearted green ogre, they will be treated to excerpts from “Thoroughly Modern Millie” and the Tony Award-winning “Fun Home.” Like all Broadway Playhouse programs, this one gives young theatergoers opportunities to perform: It will include an onstage game focused on conducting.
212-501-3303, kaufmanmusiccenter.org
THE CHILDREN’S CINEMA at Light Industry (Feb. 8, 2 p.m.). Almost exactly 62 years ago, Amos and Marcia Vogel, the married couple who founded Cinema 16, a film society showing avant-garde, experimental work to adults, started something even more radical: a program showing avant-garde, experimental work to children. Now Light Industry, an exhibition space in Brooklyn, is paying homage to that groundbreaking effort, which was called the Children’s Cinema and geared toward ages 4 to 8. This Saturday afternoon screening — doors open at 1:30, and seats are first come first served — will recreate the first bill of short films in the series. It includes Lotte Reiniger’s “The Grasshopper and the Ant” (1954), with animated figures that are hand-cut paper silhouettes; Len Lye’s “Rainbow Dance” (1936), which was psychedelic long before anyone invented the word; “Parade” (1952), by Charles and Ray Eames, which has a cast of mechanical toys; and “The Balloonatic” (1923), an aerial adventure starring Buster Keaton.
lightindustry.org
‘RAVEL AND DEBUSSY: “BOLÉRO”’ at the Kaye Playhouse (Feb. 8, 10 and 11:30 a.m.; Feb. 9, 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m.). Sometimes composers can create images as effectively as artists. This interactive program from L.O.S. Kids, a series for children ages 3 to 10 from the Little Orchestra Society, focuses on two Frenchmen, contemporaries and occasional rivals, who approached music as a form of painting with sound. Hosted by the silly yet scholarly character known as Professor Clifford O. Treblemaker, the performances (the two on Saturday offer the greatest ticket availability) will feature not only parts of Ravel’s “Boléro” and “Ma Mère l’Oye,” but also excerpts from Debussy’s “La Mer” and “Clair de Lune” and the New York debut of “On Its Way,” a Ravel-inspired piece by the young composer Nicky Sohn. In a nod to the visual theme, drawings that children created while listening to “La Mer” will be projected as a backdrop.
212-971-9500, littleorchestra.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
SUPER PET EXPO at the New Jersey Convention and Exposition Center in Edison, N.J. (Feb. 7, 3-8 p.m.; Feb. 8, 10 a.m.-7 p.m.; Feb. 9, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.). Macaws that roller skate and shoot baskets; dogs that play treibball, a soccerlike canine sport; cats that dive through hoops and tunnels — you can see all kinds of trained behavior at this annual extravaganza for pet lovers, who are invited to take along their own (friendly and leashed) furry companions. New events this year include a show from Mister Crabs, which will teach children how to build hermit-crab habitats, and Frisbee-catching exhibitions by the Mid-Atlantic Disc Dog Club. In addition to entertainment and games, the weekend will offer care advice from veterinarians, a product marketplace, adoptable animals and an expo within the expo: Repticon, for those who prefer their creature friends coldblooded and hairless.
888-718-4253, superpetexpo.com
‘THE TRAVELER’ at Theater Row (Feb. 8-9, 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.). This show consists of one actor on a nearly empty stage, but it aims to encompass multitudes and many miles. Created by Bill Bowers and Andrew Frank for New York City Children’s Theater, the 45-minute play captures the experience of immigrants and refugees who must leave everything familiar to strike out on their own. Bowers, a mime, portrays the wanderer of the title, who loses his home, packs his belongings in a suitcase, travels a long distance by foot and bus and eventually finds himself at a border crossing. Exploring what it means to form a community, the wordless production, for theatergoers 6 and older, will also be performed on April 7.
212-573-8791, ext. 1; nycchildrenstheater.org
WINTER WARMER at Rockefeller Plaza (Feb. 9, 11 a.m.-2 p.m.). Whatever the temperature is, youthful energy and high spirits should generate plenty of warmth at this free event on the plaza’s concourse level. Featuring the year’s first edition of Art Sundae, an initiative from the Art Production Fund and the gallery Fort Gansevoort, the program will invite children to create their own work with the sculptor, painter and performer Vanessa German. Using materials like cardboard cones, ribbon, twine, fabric, beads and buttons, little artists will build “power figures” — sculptures representing hope and purpose — for a future installation at the concourse’s ticket booth. Other attractions include reggae from the Rock and Roll Playhouse, a gardening workshop, performances by Puppetsburg (with Frida Kahlo and Lizzo among the characters) and a science show about rainbows.
212-588-8601, rockefellercenter.com
‘A WRINKLE IN TIME’ MOVIE MATINEE AND BOOK TALK at Public School 10 (Feb. 8, 2-6 p.m.). Many children have to deal with a parent’s absence, but none have quite the same problem as the middle-school student Meg Murry, whose father has disappeared to another part of the universe. Meg’s extraterrestrial quest to find her dad, who was out to prove a scientific theory when he vanished, is at the core of “A Wrinkle in Time,” the Newbery Medal-winning 1962 novel by the beloved writer Madeleine L’Engle. This special event in Brooklyn will start with a screening of Ava DuVernay’s 2018 film adaptation, which is “demonstratively generous, encouraging and large-spirited,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. After the movie, young readers can learn about another literary odyssey: Jennifer Szalai, a book critic for The Times, will lead a discussion with Charlotte Jones Voiklis, co-author of “Becoming Madeleine: A Biography of the Author of ‘A Wrinkle in Time’ by Her Granddaughters.” A book signing will follow.
ps10.org
