Victim of Anti-Semitic Rampage Is Unlikely to Awake From Coma, Family Says
The most grievously injured victim of an anti-Semitic mass stabbing attack in a New York City suburb remains in a coma and is unlikely to awaken, his relatives said on Tuesday night.
Josef Neumann, one of five Jewish people stabbed by an attacker during a Saturday night Hanukkah celebration, was struck three times in the head, leaving a wound that penetrated “directly into the brain,” his family said in a statement.
“Doctors are not optimistic about his chances to regain consciousness,” said the family, which also released a photograph of the 71-year-old Mr. Neumann on a hospital respirator with three stitched wounds on his head.
The man charged in the attack, Grafton E. Thomas, has pleaded not guilty to five counts of state charges of attempted murder. He was separately charged with five federal counts of obstructing the free exercise of religion in an attempt to kill.
If convicted of any of the charges, Mr. Thomas would face a maximum sentence of life in prison. If Mr. Neumann dies from his injuries, Mr. Thomas could face the death penalty, federal prosecutors said.
Mr. Neumann underwent surgery for the head wounds on Sunday and is in critical condition. “If our father does miraculously recover partially,” the statement added, “doctors expect that he will have permanent damage to the brain, leaving him partially paralyzed and speech-impaired for the rest of his life.”
The stabbing attack occurred in a Hasidic rabbi’s home in Monsey, N.Y., a hamlet about 30 miles northwest of New York City with a large community of ultra-Orthodox Jews.
An hour after the attack, the police arrested Mr. Thomas of Greenwood Lake, who is said to be 37 or 38 and is now being held in federal custody. A grand jury in Rockland County is expected to consider the charges against him on Friday.
Relatives and a lawyer for Mr. Thomas said he has suffered from mental illness but had no history of anti-Semitism.
But federal prosecutors, who have filed hate-crime charges, said Mr. Thomas made journal references to Hitler and “Nazi culture” and also repeatedly searched online for information on local temples and on topics such as “why did Hitler hate the Jews.” He also looked for “prominent companies founded by Jews in America,” prosecutors have said.
The death penalty has been prohibited by New York State law since 2007. But in rare cases, federal prosecutors in New York have said they would seek the death penalty, as in the case of Sayfullo Saipov, an Uzbek man charged in a 2017 truck attack that killed eight people on a crowded Manhattan bike path.
It would seem an unlikely scenario in Saturday’s stabbing. Juries have been generally reluctant to sentence federal defendants to death in New York State.
Last month, the Supreme Court said that it would not allow the Trump administration to resume executions in federal death penalty cases after a 16-year hiatus.
Mr. Neumann, who has seven children and many more grandchildren, was slashed three times on his head and was stabbed in the neck, the family statement said.
Mr. Neumann’s arm was shattered in the attack, the statement said, but his condition is so dire that “no surgery has yet been performed on the right arm.”
The four other victims of the attack have all been released from hospitals.
On Tuesday, additional information about their injuries emerged, as well as new details about the man who helped to stop the rampage and then provided crucial information that the police used to locate Mr. Thomas.
The man, Jacob Gluck, 32, of Monsey, said he threw a coffee table at Mr. Thomas to fight him off. He said he then lured Mr. Thomas out of the house and followed him as he drove off, memorizing his license plate and quickly calling it into the police.
Mr. Gluck, who accepted an award from the Town of Ramapo during a news conference, said a large crowd of women and children had just exited the rabbi’s house five minutes before the melee.
The attack was one of several recent anti-Semitic incidents in Jewish communities in and around New York City, including a Dec. 10 mass shooting in Jersey City, N.J., that targeted a kosher market. The two attackers killed a police officer, a market employee and two Hasidic Jews before being shot dead by the police.
The New York Police Department has since been deploying more officers to protect synagogues and yeshivas.
The Monsey attack could have been much more serious for another victim, Naftuli Frank, said Mayor Israel Spitzer of New Square, another Hasidic enclave in Rockland County.
Mr. Frank, who suffered a head wound that required 39 staples to close, was able to fend off Mr. Thomas’s knife with his arms, preventing a serious wound to his heart.
“It reached his heart,” Mr. Spitzer said, “and only made a scratch.”