How Much Watching Time Do You Have This Weekend?
No matter how much free time you have this weekend, we have TV recommendations for you. Come back every week for new suggestions on what to watch.
‘Fake or Fortune?’
When to watch: Now, on Amazon (three seasons) or Netflix (one season).
If you like your shows British and enriching, try this series about art and investigations. On each episode, Fiona Bruce and Philip Mould attempt to authenticate paintings attributed to famous artists. A collector wants to know if he really owns a Renoir. An auction house thinks it has a Rembrandt, but isn’t sure. How did a Chagall wind up there? Some Old Master from the 16th century painted this part of a church, but who in particular? Episodes are thorough and surprisingly zippy, with the pacing of a detective show and the same “send it to the lab” analyses, but with added doses of European and art history.
‘The Crystal Maze’
When to watch: Friday at 7 p.m., on Nickelodeon.
This family game show, hosted by Adam Conover, requires everyone to work together, sometimes with happy and exciting results and sometimes with “hm, have you considered family therapy?” vibes. Puzzles can be hard! Contestants move through different escape room-style challenges, earning more or less time inside a sphere that showers them with prizes at the end. Think the Nickelodeon game shows of the ’80s and ’90s, like “Legends of the Hidden Temple” or “Finders Keepers,” or especially “Nick Arcade.”
‘The Ghost Bride’
When to watch: Now, on Netflix.
Based on the book by Yangsze Choo, this six-part series (in Mandarin, with English subtitles, or dubbed) is a frothy historical romance with a supernatural streak and a murder mystery. Pan Li Lan (Huang Peijia) lives in Malacca, Malaysia, in the 1890s, and now that she is 20, she’s practically an old maid. When a wealthy family suggests that she marry its recently deceased son as a “ghost bride,” she thinks it could solve several problems at once — until she gets sucked in to the tumultuous world of afterlife drama. This show is definitely not for everyone, but if you watched “Cable Girls” and thought “I wish this also had a minotaur-like monster, handsome ghosts and an entire shadow realm,” it will be for you.