Corrections: Jan. 19, 2020
An article last Sunday about Prince Harry and Meghan Markle’s decision to “step back” from royal duties misidentified one of the sources of Harry’s inheritance. It was his great-grandmother’s estate, not his grandmother’s.
The Scene City article last Sunday misstated the location of an awards gala held by the National Board of Review. It was at Cipriani 42nd Street, not Cipriani Wall Street.  
An article on Jan. 5 about the marketing of hydration misstated the surname of a dermatologist. He is Dr. Joshua Zeichner, not Zeigler.
An article on Jan. 5 about the Norwegian archipelago Svalbard misstated its location. It is 1,200 miles north of Oslo, not from mainland Norway. The article also referred incorrectly to the makeup of Svalbard’s population. Its inhabitants are mostly from Russia and Scandinavia — not Russia, Scandinavia and Canada.
An article on Page 48 about split-jury verdicts misstates the number of people the Innocence Project New Orleans says have been exonerated in Louisiana since 2000. It is 43, not 56.
An article on Page 42 about the staging of sex scenes for film and theater misstates Siobhan Richardson’s title. She is an intimacy director, not an intimacy coordinator. The article also omits an aspect of her relationship to Intimacy Directors International. She is one of the founders. And the article misstates the name of the theater program at the New School. It is the School of Drama at the New School, not the New School for Drama.
An article on Aug. 18, 2019, about the legacy of racial myths in modern medicine misstated the proportion of medical students and residents surveyed who believed that black skin is thicker than white skin. It was a third of those surveyed, not a majority. The article also misidentified the medical condition of children described in a 2013 review. They had conditions that required adenoidectomies or tonsillectomies; they did not have appendicitis.
The Paperback Row column on Jan. 5, using information from the publisher, misstated the academic affiliation of Justin Driver, the author of “The Schoolhouse Gate.” He is a professor at Yale Law School; he is no longer at the University of Chicago Law School.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.