Janet Mock and Taylor Swift to Be Honored at Glaad Awards
The “Pose” writer, director and producer Janet Mock and the Grammy Award-winning artist Taylor Swift will be honored for promoting the acceptance of L.G.B.T.Q. people at this year’s Glaad Media Awards.
Mock will be honored with the Stephen F. Kolzak Award, which is presented to an L.G.B.T.Q. media professional who has promoted acceptance.
Before her work on “Pose,” where she became the first transgender woman of color to write and direct an episode of television, Mock worked on the HBO documentary “The Trans List” and wrote an Allure column, Beauty Beyond Binaries.
Last June, Mock signed a three-year, multimillion-dollar deal at Netflix, where she’ll continue working to create programs that employ people and highlight stories from underrepresented communities.
“She’s achieved a lot of firsts for the trans community and for people of color,” Sarah Kate Ellis, Glaad president and chief executive officer, said in a phone interview, “and to elevate her and put her on the stage and honor her for the work that she’s done is really important.”
Ellis, who noted the number of transgender women who were killed in 2019, added that this is especially crucial now, “when we’re seeing so many trans lives at stake.”
Swift will receive the Vanguard Award, which is given to allies who promote equality, joining past winners like Jay-Z, Beyoncé and Britney Spears.
After spending much of her career shying away from political statements, Swift has been advocating L.G.B.T.Q. rights in recent years.
“She’s come out in a really bold way in support of the L.G.B.T.Q. community, especially around the Equality Act,” Ellis said.
The singer has worked to bring attention to the legislation, which would prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, by starting a Change.org petition and by writing a letter to United States Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.
When the music video for her song “You Need to Calm Down,” featuring L.G.B.T.Q. celebrities, won the award for Video for Good and Video of the Year at the 2019 MTV Video Music Awards, Swift also used her acceptance speech to call for a White House response to the petition.
Mock and Swift will be honored at an awards ceremony in Los Angeles  on April 16. The nominees for the Glaad Media Awards will be announced on Wednesday.