Gustavo Dudamel Extends Contract With Los Angeles Philharmonic
The star conductor Gustavo Dudamel has extended his contract as music and artistic director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, cementing his commitment to the acclaimed orchestra after a period of administrative upheaval.
Announced on Wednesday, the four-year extension will keep Mr. Dudamel, 38, in Los Angeles at least through the 2025-26 season, his 17th with the Philharmonic. It maintains what has proved a winning formula: the pairing of a conductor whose fame extends beyond the classical music world and is a powerful audience draw with an orchestra that has developed perhaps the strongest reputation in the country for innovative programming and community outreach.
“We have a unique opportunity and responsibility in Los Angeles to unite the soul of the Americas, to build and to strengthen musical and educational bridges with our brothers and sisters here in L.A. and beyond,” Mr. Dudamel said in a statement.
The extension comes after a rocky fall at the Philharmonic. The orchestra announced in September that its chief executive officer, Simon Woods, was stepping down, effective immediately. He had been in the position for less than two years after succeeding Deborah Borda, whose leadership since the turn of the century had helped make the orchestra into a powerhouse, with a budget — $125 million a year — that dwarfs other ensembles and an endowment that has quintupled over the past two decades.
In October, the Philharmonic named Chad Smith, its widely respected chief operating officer, as its new chief executive. Mr. Smith has a long association with Mr. Dudamel: In a statement, Mr. Smith noted that the two men had planned Mr. Dudamel’s American debut at the Hollywood Bowl together, 15 years ago.
Mr. Dudamel — who was born in Venezuela and trained there by El Sistema, the free music program that teaches music to children, including in some of its poorest areas — occupies a unique position in music. He is sought by leading orchestras, including the Berlin Philharmonic and the New York Philharmonic, which he will conduct for two weeks beginning Wednesday evening. But he also appeared in a Super Bowl halftime show; is billed as Trollzart in the upcoming animated film “Trolls World Tour”; is conducting the music for Steven Spielberg’s film version of “West Side Story”; and inspired a messy-haired main character in the Amazon series “Mozart in the Jungle.”
He was just 28 in 2009, when he led his first performance as music director in Los Angeles. He continues to also hold the post of music director of the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela, but after he criticized the Venezuelan government in 2017, the country canceled his planned international tour with that ensemble. While he has not been able to perform with the Simón Bolívar since then, he still works with the ensemble remotely and sometimes meets outside Venezuela with groups of its players.
In Mr. Smith’s statement, he praised Mr. Dudamel’s “expansive vision of what an orchestra can be and what it can mean to its community.” Mr. Dudamel said that he was particularly proud of the Philharmonic’s educational outreach, especially the Youth Orchestra Los Angeles, a program inspired by El Sistema that was founded in 2007. The Philharmonic is currently building a new center and concert hall for the youth orchestra designed by Frank Gehry, the architect of the Philharmonic’s acclaimed Walt Disney Concert Hall; it is expected to open in the fall and cost $23.5 million.
By the end of his contract, Mr. Dudamel will have been at the Philharmonic’s podium for 17 seasons, the same as his predecessor, Esa-Pekka Salonen. Before that, the conductor with the longest tenure at the orchestra had been Zubin Mehta, who held the post for 16 years.