In South India, a Fragmented Family Turns Into an Overflowing One
SMALL DAYS AND NIGHTS
By Tishani Doshi

Tishani Doshi’s third novel begins with a homecoming and the sensorial onslaught such a trip entails. Landing in Madras, in South India, the protagonist, Grace, braces herself for its “heavy, sweaty air, which smells of something that was once sweet, now rotting.” Soon she’s sitting in a rickety taxi, as if she were in “the belly of a whale on the crazy seas of the Tamil Nadu highways,” jolting and swerving on her way to her mother’s house. As she approaches, Grace recalls how her mother fell in love with her father, an acousticophobic Italian, whom she eventually left for a spiritual guru. Readers ready themselves for a whirlwind of a woman to open the front door once the car pulls up at its destination. But Doshi has other plans for this character: “My mother,” Grace announces, “is in her bedroom in a freezer box on the floor.”
“Small Days and Nights” is about a woman whose mother’s death prompts her to leave her unhappy married life in America and rebuild her home and family back in India. First, Grace inherits an overgrown property on the beach. Then, discovering that her parents had a second daughter whom they never told her about, Grace brings the girl to this big, breezy home. Lucia, who has Down syndrome, is both sister and child to Grace. The woman who studiously refused to have children with her husband now becomes a full-time caregiver. Her mother’s house, with its gate that never locks properly, influences Grace to abandon her sparse Western life for a lush wildness only India can provide.
As the title suggests, the story builds, one daily routine, one daily detail at a time. But Doshi treats this everydayness like the beach on which Grace lives: as a back-and-forth proposition, constantly in motion, always shifting slightly. Every day Lucia is a little different; every few months the local dogs have more puppies; every so often the village politics flare up and spatter across Grace’s garden. The effect is that the tide’s push and pull settle into a horizon, a plotline that’s both repetitive and linear. “Small Days and Nights” thrives on these pushes and pulls, allowing opposites to coexist. A corpse in a freezer box feels alive and eccentric. A lifelong family secret turns into a forthright responsibility. Grace’s urban friends seem more rustic than the village children. The novel’s marine backdrop is “beautiful, but somehow posed with certain dangers.”
However, even a lilt can become a drone. Although “Small Days and Nights” succeeds in its first-person narrative (which is more truthful and wholesome than that of any character in Doshi’s previous novel, “The Pleasure Seekers”), by the middle of the book Grace’s listlessness and confusion can become tiresome. Doshi has said she believes that literature allows for “multiple expressions of the same story,” but Grace is too moody and preoccupied to pull this off. In Doshi’s poem “Contract,” which opens her third collection of poetry, she writes about the future: “If it is bleak, I will lie / so that you may live / seized with wonder.” But there are no lies here, and Doshi’s characters are seized with despair.
What work best are the book’s language and the evocation of South India. Doshi’s coastal map is current, with its sea an “exhausted gray tongue.” And, most impressively, her focus never wavers. Starting with a corpse in a freezer box, “Small Days and Nights” turns a fragmented family into an overflowing one. An estranged father and deceased mother end up creating a legacy that includes a house, sisters, husbands and lovers, a village headman and his wife and those ever-breeding dogs — and seemingly without anything specific happening.
As Grace declares early on, “I am waiting for something to happen, but it must happen without any conniving.” The rest of the book is everything that happens while Grace continues to wait for whatever is supposed to happen. Days and nights pass this way: frustrating, eventful, drunken, emotional. Momentous and mundane, day after day. Doshi keeps the pendulum swinging until the very last page.