She Hustled to Create Her Art. Then Unemployment Hit.
In the 1980s, Carolyn Coleman was an artsy high school student in Louisville, Ky. One summer, a friend returned from an extended trip to New York City with treasures that Ms. Coleman remembers to this day.
“She brought all this music and fashion with her,” Ms. Coleman said in a recent interview. There were Fiorucci boots and mixtapes with music by the Smiths, Nina Hagen and Tones on Tail. “She had cut her hair. She had quit reading the Bible. She just had become a philosopher.”
After hearing about her friend’s experience in New York, Ms. Coleman recalled thinking, “This is where I have to go now.”
Having spent her childhood pursuing art and making clothes, Ms. Coleman applied to Parsons School of Design and moved to New York in 1986. She spent a year there studying to become a fashion designer but dropped out when it became too expensive.
In the two years that followed, Ms. Coleman worked in retail, did freelance textile design and made displays for Tower Records before giving California a shot. She settled in Berkeley, enrolled in courses through the Peralta Community College District, worked at a vintage clothing store and immersed herself in the local music scene. She began teaching herself how to play guitar and singing in bands, and she realized she wanted to play professionally.
“I literally felt like I had been in denial my whole life,” she said.
In 1993, Ms. Coleman moved back to New York and started busking in the subway, playing guitar and singing indie rock. In addition to the roughly $150 weekly earnings, busking allowed her to network with other musicians and artists. Soon she was performing shows at ABC No Rio and the Gas Station, and singing and recording with D.J.s.
During those years, Ms. Coleman worked in retail, including for the skin-care company Kiehl’s. In the ’90s, she said, she was fortunate to find jobs that gave her time to record and perform — and even go on tour.
“I don’t even think I had references then,” Ms. Coleman said. “People would like you and hire you on the spot.”
But as the rents in many neighborhoods in New York started to increase, artists around the city had to make sacrifices. After a tour with the punk band the Slits in 2010, and a three-month solo tour in Europe in 2012, Ms. Coleman started to run up debt. By 2013, she began working multiple jobs, including at Equinox and at the nightclub Output. She received housing assistance from the nonprofit organization MusiCares.
By the time Output closed its doors in January 2019, Ms. Coleman was working as an assistant in the club’s office. Now in her early 50s, she wasn’t eager to go back to working late shifts at a different club, so she decided to apply for office management roles, but wasn’t getting responses.
“Clearly I’m out of date,” she thought.
Ms. Coleman considered going back to school to finish her bachelor’s degree, but she was wary about taking out loans and was unsure of how she could schedule classes around work. She started collecting unemployment benefits in March, and was applying for health care several months later at the Labor Department when she came across a flier for the Grace Institute. The nonprofit institute provides low-income women with job skills, counseling, placement services and continuing education.
She wrestled with the decision to seek more assistance, saying she had felt judged in the past for having “the nerve to try to do what I want artistically” and for not following a more traditional career path.
“It took me a lot to learn how to ask for help, to be honest,” she said.
In August, she enrolled in Grace’s Administrative Professional Program. Ms. Coleman learned Microsoft programs, but more important, she said, she found a supportive space.
“Being in an environment where it was O.K. to ask for help and also let other people know was really great,” she said.
As part of the program, Ms. Coleman also completed an internship at ASA College. The Community Service Society, one of the seven organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, used $127 for a monthly MetroCard to help with Ms. Coleman’s commute to Grace in Lower Manhattan and to her internship at ASA College’s Midtown Manhattan and Downtown Brooklyn locations from her apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
“The money that I didn’t have to spend on a MetroCard, that’s food money and laundry and basic needs,” she said. “So it was a huge help.”
She also received a grant through the Community Service Society to cover her December rent.
In December, Ms. Coleman graduated from the program and she is eager to re-enter the work force with help from recruiters she met through Grace.
But that doesn’t mean that she’s giving up on her artistic dreams. She wants to become more financially stable so that she can continue making music as a D.J. and as a performer with four bands.
“I can’t imagine not being creative and making things,” she said. “It’s not even like I chose this. I feel like that’s when I’m my true self.”