Inside the Fight Over Trump’s Israel-Palestine Deal
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it Tuesdays and Thursdays.
President Trump unveiled his plan to end one of the world’s oldest and most intractable conflicts on Tuesday in what he has called “the deal of the century.” The 180-page proposal, which was drafted without Palestinian input, would grant Israel most of its demands in exchange for the possibility of a future Palestinian state with limited sovereignty.
The plan was predictably greeted with enthusiasm by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and condemnation by President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority. Here are the central parts of the plan, why it’s so controversial and how people on different sides of the issue are responding.
Background: The state of Israel was forged after the Holocaust in the crucible of the 1948 Arab-Israeli war, which left Israel with control over 78 percent of what had previously been British-controlled Palestine. After the Six-Day War in 1967, Israel took control of the remaining 22 percent of Palestinian land, as well as the Sinai Peninsula from Egypt and the Golan Heights from Syria.
Some proposals for a two-state solution have looked to the pre-1967 borders as a palimpsest over which the lines of a new Palestinian state might be sketched. Mr. Trump’s plan would allocate roughly 70 percent of the West Bank for Palestinian control; the cession of Israeli land near Gaza would make up for the remaining 30 percent.
Critical point: The West Bank is populated with Israeli settlements, which much of the world regards as illegal.
Mr. Trump’s plan endorses the Netanyahu doctrine that, for Israel, “Might is always right,” writes Diana Buttu, a lawyer and former adviser to the Palestine Liberation Organization. “Rewarding Israel for building settlements sends the clear message to other dictatorships around the world that they, too, can do as they please and that they, too, will be rewarded,” she argues. “Every country under threat around the world will hear that they, too, can be invaded, their land stolen and their people deprived of rights.”
But the plan would reconfigure the conflict, which would present an opportunity for shrinking it, argues Micah Goodman. While it wouldn’t end, he says, it would be different: “The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a conflict between occupiers and the occupied. But after the plan it would become a conflict between two separate political entities — and that’s an entirely new paradigm.”
The recognition of some of Israel’s territorial expansion since 1967 simply reflects changes in political realities as the Palestinians rejected previous peace deals, writes The Wall Street Journal’s editorial board. “No one serious in Israel expects the major settlement blocks to be demolished,” they say.
The 1948 war resulted in the flight or expulsion of some 700,000 Palestinians from their homes, creating a refugee crisis that remains unresolved. Today, those refugees and their descendants, spread out across the region, number around five million.
The idea of a “right of return” is antithetical to the two-state solution and to peace, according to Tzipi Livni, a former Israeli foreign minister.  “As the state of Israel is, by definition, the answer to the national aspiration of the Jewish people, as Israel absorbed Jewish refugees that came from all over the world,” she wrote in 2018, “the creation of the Palestinian state, by definition, provides the answer for the entire Palestinian people wherever they may be, including Palestinian refugees.”
But it is precisely Palestinians’ historical claims to Israeli land that makes a two-state solution untenable, argues Yousef Munayyer, the executive director of the U.S. Campaign for Palestinian Rights and a Palestinian citizen of Israel. For the better part of a century, he says, Western powers have repeatedly tried “accommodating the Zionist demand for a Jewish-majority state in a land populated overwhelmingly by Palestinians.” This, he contends, is a circle that cannot be squared. Instead, “Israelis and Palestinians should work together to craft a constitution that would uphold the rights of all.”
Under Mr. Trump’s plan, Israel would gain formal sovereignty over an undivided Jerusalem as its capital, while the Palestinian capital would sit on the outer edge of the city beyond an existing wall. The city’s status as a holy site for all three Abrahamic religions has made it a central point of contention in peace negotiations.
Under the United Nations’s 1947 partition plan, Jerusalem was never intended to be the capital of any country, Ms. Buttu wrote in 2017, but “rather a shared city under an international regime with sovereignty resting with neither Israel nor Palestinians.” In 1980, the United Nations deemed Israel’s declaration of Jerusalem as its unified capital a violation of international law.
But Mr. Trump’s plan stipulates that returning to a divided Jerusalem “would be a grave mistake,” particularly because it would entail “having two separate security forces in one of the most sensitive areas on earth.” And many Israeli Jews, such as the writer Shmuel Rosner, believe that Jerusalem “is our capital and it always will be.”
Mr. Trump’s plan sets aside the goal of a full-fledged Palestinian state; he promised that Palestinians could “achieve an independent state of their very own” but gave few details.  Mr. Netanyahu said the deal provided a “pathway to a Palestinian state” under as-yet-unspecified conditions.
This future entity, however, would lack certain characteristics of a state, explains the Israeli reporter Amir Tibon. “The streets of all of its cities, towns and villages, as well as the roads connecting them, will be under the full control of the military of another state — Israel. It will have no control over its borders, which will also be controlled by Israel,” he adds.
In this regard, Mr. Trump, much like his Democratic and Republican predecessors, is merely giving Israel cover to perpetuate what is known as the status quo, argues Nathan Thrall. Namely: “Israel as the sole sovereign controlling the territory between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea, depriving millions of stateless people of basic civil rights, restricting their movement, criminalizing speech that may harm ‘public order,’ jailing them in indefinite ‘administrative detention’ without trial or charge, and dispossessing them of their land.”
But The Jerusalem Post’s editorial board believes that the deal strikes the right balance between Palestinian aspirations and Israeli security.
There is also an economic component of the deal: what it describes as the “potential to facilitate” $50 billion in investment over 10 years in infrastructure, coupled with a “pro-growth tax structure,” promising to double the Palestinian economy in 10 years, create over one million new jobs, cut poverty in half and reduce the poverty rate by 50 percent. No prior plan, argues Ahmed Charai, “has gone as far in articulating a plan to foster Palestinian civil and economic vitality.”
But the plan is thin on details, and it’s hard to imagine anyone investing billions of dollars in big infrastructure and transportation projects for Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza while the Israeli government continues to annex more territory in the former and regularly bombs the latter, Mr. Ward writes.
Do you have a point of view we missed? Email us at debatable@nytimes.com. Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
“Why the Palestinian leadership should not reject Trump’s peace plan.” [The Jerusalem Post]
“For Bibi and Trump, peace means Palestinian submission.” [+972 Magazine]
“World reacts to Donald Trump’s Israel-Palestine plan.” [Middle East Eye]
Here’s what readers had to say about the last debate: Should you be worried about the coronavirus?
Tina from British Columbia (via email): “Since the outbreak, it’s become nearly impossible to be Chinese in a public space. Sneezing or coughing draws skeptical glares that could make you feel as if you really ought to be in quarantine, even if your chances of catching the virus are identical to the person who is slowly inching away from you on the train in disgust.”
Dave from New Mexico: “Schaffner is overconfident. Predicting the future is a fool’s errand. Sure, it’s not time to panic but there is also the possibility that it will be the reverse. Phony certainty is not what’s needed.”