Readers Respond to Our Look at the Politics of American History Textbooks
After we published an examination of how politics shapes the content of American history textbooks in Texas and California, thousands of people reacted online.
Hundreds of differences — including some that reflect the nation’s deepest partisan divides on issues like race, gender and immigration —  emerged in the analysis of eight commonly used textbooks in California and Texas, two of the country’s largest markets.
We heard from educators, historians, politicians, parents and students, from within the two states and from across the nation. Here is what they had to say:
The Princeton historian Kevin M. Kruse started a conversation with his Twitter followers about the long history of  conservative activists working to influence the Texas curriculum. He shared a 1982 Texas Monthly profile of Norma and Mel Gabler, who organized against what they saw as liberal bias in textbooks, setting the template for similar efforts since.
Professor Kruse also called attention to the findings in our piece on how Reconstruction and lynchings were covered differently in the two states.
One teacher, Peggy Warren, wrote on Twitter that the article was “Solidifying my decision to not use the designated textbook in my classroom! Primary sources are the way to go!”
Some people questioned how much students retain from textbooks. But others responded that textbooks may be most influential as a guide to teachers on how to focus their lessons.
James, a Times reader in Los Angeles, commented, “I teach college freshmen. Those of you who think that these textbooks have little or no effect on the students’ education are being naïve. I see the difference every day. Some states simply teach better history.”
Writing on the Mother Jones website, the journalist Kevin Drum said, “I hate both of these textbooks. I hate all textbooks these days. Cut them all in half! Get rid of the endless boxed inserts and stupid ‘discussion points.’ But add more charts! If I had been forced to learn American history from one of these overstuffed, chopped-up monstrosities, I’d probably hate history too.”
And Prudence Carter, dean of the Graduate School of Education at the University of California, Berkeley, said trainee teachers should be educated about how textbooks are produced:
Trish Zornio, a Democratic candidate for Senate in Colorado, wrote on Facebook, “As an educator myself I’ve long supported a basic federal common core curriculum (e.g. evolution not creationism) to ensure American children get consistent and quality education no matter where they grow up. This comparison of textbooks between two states shows why it’s vital.”
And Richard N. Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, said:
Nikole Hannah-Jones, a writer at The New York Times Magazine and the creator of The 1619 Project, responded to Mr. Haass’s comments:
One educator, Michael Pershan, wrote on Twitter, “One of the nice things about the @DanaGoldstein piece is it avoided the ‘politics is intruding on history’ narrative. Political influence is a given — the piece showed how it plays out in a politically divided country. It’s going to happen in liberal and conservative regions.”
And Maddi Hellmich, an Indiana State college student, also pointed out that history is always written from a specific perspective:

