Les Wexner, Victoria’s Secret Owner, Is in Talks to Step Down
Leslie H. Wexner, the longtime leader of a retail empire that includes Victoria’s Secret who is under scrutiny for his ties to the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, has been in discussions to step aside as chief executive of the L Brands parent company, according to one current and one former executive who spoke on condition of anonymity to talk about internal deliberations.
Mr. Wexner, 82, has sought to distance himself from Mr. Epstein — even addressing the relationship at an annual investor meeting in September — since Mr. Epstein was arrested in July and charged with sex trafficking involving girls as young as 14. Mr. Wexner has emphasized that he had no knowledge of the alleged activities. Mr. Epstein died in August in what authorities said was an apparent suicide.
But Mr. Wexner came under intense pressure for having employed Mr. Epstein as a personal adviser for years and handing him sweeping powers over his finances, philanthropy and private life. Mr. Epstein was empowered to borrow money on behalf of Mr. Wexner and sign Mr. Wexner’s tax returns, as well as hire people and make acquisitions. Over the years, Mr. Epstein obtained a mansion in Manhattan, a luxury estate in Ohio and a private plane — possessions worth roughly $100 million together today — that had previously been owned by Mr. Wexner or his companies.
News of the relationship spurred chaos inside a company that was already struggling to keep up with changing beauty ideals among American women and had only recently made board changes at the behest of an activist investor. According to the former executive, Mr. Wexner has also explored a partial sale of L Brands.
“We’re not going to comment on such rumors,” Tammy Roberts Myers, a spokeswoman for L Brands, said on Wednesday when asked about Mr. Wexner’s potential plans. The news regarding Mr. Wexner’s deliberations was first reported by The Wall Street Journal. The company’s stock jumped nearly 13 percent on Wednesday.
The company is also preparing to lay off employees, according to two current executives, though it was not clear how many. There have already been meetings with individual employees who are being let go, they said.
And employees at Victoria’s Secret’s younger Pink brand were notified this month that there would be a strict “media blackout” starting Thursday and going through Feb. 15, according to a person familiar with the internal communications. Employees understood that to mean that all marketing, store events and other P.R. initiatives will cease during that time, the person said.
L Brands said in July that it had hired lawyers at the direction of its board “to conduct a thorough review” of Mr. Wexner’s relationship with Mr. Epstein. The investigation is still active, and the company has not provided an update. Last summer, the company lost its longtime marketing chief, Ed Razek, who abruptly retired after more than three decades. He was a confidant of Mr. Wexner’s and integral to the rise of the brand’s models, known as Angels.
In October, Victoria’s Secret laid off about 15 percent of employees at its Columbus, Ohio, headquarters. At the time, language in the separation agreement given to some laid-off employees spoke to the intense microscope the company has come under. The agreement document, which was reviewed by The New York Times, asked departing executives to agree that they would not make any statements to the media about the company, its employees or its operations, and that they would “direct all contacts from the media” regarding the company to Ms. Myers, the L Brands spokeswoman, or her successor. That language did not appear in a separation agreement from 2017.
Mr. Wexner is an outsize figure in the Columbus area, where many residents either work for his company or did in the past. He is the longest-serving chief executive in the S&P 500, and he and his wife, Abigail, are the biggest individual donors to Ohio State University. For years he was a major Republican donor.
He helped shape the modern American shopping mall through L Brands, formerly Limited Brands, which he has since carved down to two crown jewels: Victoria’s Secret and Bath & Body Works. He has proved adept at spinning off brands at premium prices over the years — the chains Abercrombie & Fitch, Express, Lane Bryant and the Limited were all part of the Wexner empire at one point.
He acquired Victoria’s Secret as a small brand in the 1980s and built it into a global behemoth that redefined the notion of sexiness for many American men and women. Under Mr. Wexner’s leadership, the company also launched the careers of its Angels, including Tyra Banks and Heidi Klum, propelled by the belief that the brand didn’t need to hire young female stars — it could create them.
But the Victoria’s Secret definition of sexy has come under fire in the #MeToo era, particularly as upstarts like Third Love and newer brands like American Eagle’s Aerie promote body diversity and inclusivity. Mr. Wexner said last year that the brand would pull its long-running fashion show from network television and noted that Victoria’s Secret, which is still the biggest lingerie brand in the United States, needed to “evolve and change to grow.”
In March, Barington Capital Group, an activist investor, wrote that Victoria’s Secret had “failed to evolve with the times.” Barington questioned the independence of L Brands’ board, noting that through the Columbus community and Ohio State University many directors had strong ties to Mr. Wexner and his wife, who is also a director.