Who Are the House Impeachment Managers in the Trump Trial?
One was an Army Ranger. Another, a police chief. Still another, a corporate lawyer. Together, seven House Democrats will serve as managers of the impeachment trial in the Senate and press the case that President Trump abused the power of his office and obstructed Congress.
Chosen by Speaker Nancy Pelosi, the seven House impeachment managers vary in age and experience and reflect the geographic and demographic diversity of the Democratic caucus, with three women, two African-Americans and one Latina.
Here is a look at the legislators who will prosecute the president.
Representative Jason Crow is the only impeachment manager who does not serve on any of the committees that led the impeachment inquiry. But as a former Army Ranger who served in Iraq and Afghanistan, he brings military credentials that could play a critical role in the trial as Democrats make the case that Mr. Trump withheld $391 million in military aid in an effort to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rivals. Mr. Crow was one of seven freshmen from conservative-leaning districts — all military veterans or former intelligence analysts — who wrote an op-ed in September urging Congress to impeach Mr. Trump if the accusations involving military aid were true. Many saw the piece as a crucial development that showed that Democratic lawmakers had enough backing — including among their politically vulnerable colleagues — to press ahead and open an impeachment inquiry into the president. Mr. Crow, who is 40 and a lawyer, flipped a Republican-held seat in 2018.
[Read more about Mr. Crow.]
Representative Val B. Demings’s law enforcement background; her questioning of Robert S. Mueller III, the former special counsel, in July; and her experience on both the Intelligence and Judiciary Committees helped propel her into a role as an impeachment manager in only her second term in Congress. Elected in 2016, Ms. Demings, 62, had a 27-year career in the Orlando Police Department and made history in 2007 as the department’s first female police chief. The youngest of seven children, she grew up in a two-room home in Jacksonville, Fla. Her mother, Elouise, was a maid and her father, James, a janitor. Ms. Demings attended segregated schools and was the first in her family to graduate from college, obtaining a criminology degree from Florida State University.
[Read more about Ms. Demings.]
A freshman Democrat and one of the first two Latina congresswomen from Texas, Representative Sylvia R. Garcia will bring to the impeachment trial experience as a lawyer and former presiding judge of the Houston municipal court system. A former Houston city controller and Texas state senator, Ms. Garcia, 69, was elected to Congress in 2018 and serves on the Judiciary Committee, which released a report in December outlining the legal and historical case for impeaching Mr. Trump. Born in a South Texas farming community, the eighth of 10 children, she graduated from Texas Woman’s University and obtained her law degree from Texas Southern University.
[Read more about Ms. Garcia.]
A former litigator and the No. 5 Democrat in the House, Representative Hakeem Jeffries is the highest-ranking member of the party leadership on the impeachment team. Many Democrats believe he is poised to become the first black speaker of the House. During the impeachment process, he has emerged as one of the Democrats’ top messaging lieutenants, deploying punchy declarations of resolve to hold Mr. Trump accountable and icy rebukes of Republicans who have scorned the effort as a partisan ploy. A former litigator at an elite corporate law firm in New York, Mr. Jeffries, 49, once defended CBS in a lawsuit over Janet Jackson’s wardrobe malfunction at the 2004 Super Bowl. He won his first political race in 2006, securing a seat in the New York State Assembly after two unsuccessful attempts. He was elected to Congress in 2012.
[Read more about Mr. Jeffries.]
Representative Zoe Lofgren will enter the Senate trial having played a role in two previous impeachment inquiries. She served on the House Judiciary Committee in 1998, when it approved articles of impeachment against President Bill Clinton for lying about an affair with a White House intern. And as a young law student in 1974, she helped the committee draft Watergate charges against President Richard M. Nixon. Ms. Lofgren, 72, served as a member of the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors and worked for her predecessor, Representative Don Edwards, before she was elected to the House in 1994. The daughter of a truck driver and a cafeteria cook, she holds degrees from Stanford University and Santa Clara University School of Law.
[Read more about Ms. Lofgren.]
As chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Representative Jerrold Nadler helped draft and approve the two articles of impeachment against Mr. Trump in December. Campaigning for the committee chairmanship in 2017, Mr. Nadler pitched himself as a lifelong fighter for civil rights and civil liberties as well as an expert in constitutional law who was the “strongest member to lead a potential impeachment.” In the Senate, he is likely to work alongside the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee to make the case for why Mr. Trump should be removed from office. The son of a chicken farmer, Mr. Nadler, 72, was elected to Congress in 1992 after serving in the New York State Assembly.
[Read more about Mr. Nadler.]
Representative Adam B. Schiff was chosen to be the lead House manager of the impeachment trial after emerging as one of the most prominent Democrats spearheading the inquiry into Mr. Trump’s conduct. A former federal prosecutor who serves as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, he began digging into the accusations that gave rise to the impeachment inquiry when he pushed for the disclosure to Congress of a whistle-blower complaint alleging a scheme by the president to enlist Ukraine to help him in the 2020 election. Mr. Schiff’s high-profile role has made him a favorite target of Republicans, including Mr. Trump, who calls him “Little Pencil Neck” and “Shifty Schiff.” Mr. Schiff, 59, graduated from Stanford University and Harvard Law School and was elected to Congress in 2000 after serving as a California state lawmaker.
[Read more about Mr. Schiff.]