When Deval Patrick Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
Today on “The Choice,” the endorsement podcast from NYT Opinion, Deval Patrick, the former Massachusetts governor, visits the Times boardroom for his interview. The editorial board pushed him on his late entry into the race, his moderate proposals for America’s varied crises and the lingering scandals from his governorship. Plus: “PatrickCare,” a saint for president, and buying new hips vs. soap.
Then, tune in to the bonus deliberation episode below to hear the board’s reactions and concerns after Mr. Patrick’s interview, and a deeper dive into the Democratic primary field’s foreign policy positions with editorial board member Alex Kingsbury.
To read the unabridged transcript from the interview with Mr. Patrick, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the primary election candidates on the job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different Democratic candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Jan. 30, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to its decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the United States.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and their endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey