Do Electronic Records Help or Hinder Patient Care?
To the Editor:
“Our Health Record Mess,” by Theresa Brown and Stephen Bergman (Op-Ed, Jan. 1), hits the nail on the head about electronic health records. We have been practicing primary care medicine for 30 years. Our goal has always been personalized medicine. Our focus has remained on the patient and the best quality care, not on repetitive, onerous documentation and box checking to satisfy government regulations and insurance companies’ quest for maximal reimbursements.
Our profession has become obsessed with the corporatization of medicine, creating what we call the doctor-computer-patient relationship. Forces all around us are compelling us to become a part of this mess. This is personally distressing because it is pushing medical care in the wrong direction, away from direct face-to-face patient care. Everyone in the health care profession suffers, especially the patient. It will take all of us speaking out against it if there will be any change.
David Baskin
Martin Baskin
New York
To the Editor:
Physicians and nurses have a relationship based on the common goal of caring for our patients. As with any profession or office environment, there will always be personality differences, but in no other workplace is so much in jeopardy. There is so much more positive communication and coordination between health care professionals than what is portrayed in your article.
The electronic medical record system has certainly added to the burden of caring for our patients, but it has also improved our ability to document a patient’s care. Before the implementation of electronic medical records, we struggled with deciphering handwritten and disorganized notes of our colleagues.
A patient’s care can now be smoothly transitioned between providers and hospital shifts to ensure that the continuity of care is upheld. We do need a universal electronic medical record system to bring us to the next level, similar to that used within the Department of Veterans Affairs.
While the health care system is far from perfect, medical providers are unified in providing the best care for their patients, clearly visible on the front lines.
Richard M. Evans
Suffern, N.Y.
The writer, a urologist, is vice president of surgical services for Bon Secours Charity Health System.
To the Editor:
“Our Health Record Mess” nicely capsulizes the problems experienced by providers, principally nurses and physicians, in our age of the electronic health records. But it does not propose much in the way of a solution.
In 2008, proposed legislation (H.R. 6898) included a plan that would have provided for an electronic health record free or at nominal cost to providers, based on the open source Veterans Affairs system, VistA, and governed by a consortium of individuals with expertise in open source health information technology.
That provision was quickly killed by the proprietary software lobby, but the remainder of H.R. 6898 survived as essentially an early draft of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, referred to by the authors.
The excised provisions of H.R. 6898 would have done much — and if reintroduced and enacted, still could do much — to make today’s electronic health records more user-friendly and less costly, and to help solve the nagging problems of interoperability and security. They would become integral, rather than just a burdensome adjunct, to health care delivery.
Bruce Wilder
New Orleans
The writer is a neurosurgeon.