Trump Administration Expected to Loosen Military’s Limits on Land Mines
WASHINGTON — The Pentagon confirmed on Thursday that it is preparing to change its current restrictions on the military’s use of anti-personnel land mines, and the new policy is expected to allow the use of these weapons in more areas of potential conflict.
The anticipated change would still limit the procurement of new anti-personnel mines to those that eventually self-destruct — but notably it would allow their use outside of the Korean Peninsula, officials said.
The move would effectively cancel a 2014 policy of the Obama administration that had limited the use of anti-personnel mines to the Korean Peninsula, and continued the destruction of land-mine stockpiles not required for the defense of South Korea.
It would be the latest in a string of policy reversals made by the Trump Administration on the use of weapons that had been limited by treaties, and even condemned internationally.
The new order also is expected to transfer the authority for deploying the mines from the secretary of defense down to the military’s geographic combatant commanders, who are in charge of fighting the nation’s wars around the world.
During a Pentagon news conference Thursday, Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper said “there will be a change coming out” regarding the policy on anti-personnel land mines but declined to elaborate. The announcement is expected to come from the White House as early as Friday.
Anti-personnel land mines — small explosive charges that are usually buried in the ground and detonated when stepped upon — have drawn widespread international condemnation for at least three decades.
Older versions, often called “dumb” mines, have mechanical fuzes and remain lethal for an indefinite amount of time. Newer mines that are capable of destroying themselves after a specific amount of time are called “smart” by comparison.
In 1997, more than 120 nations signed the Ottawa Convention banning anti-personnel land mines that do not self-destruct. Notably, the United States was not among them, citing a need to use these mines along the border between North and South Korea, and is not among the 164 nations that are now party to the treaty.
This latest policy shift in some ways mirrors a November 2017 announcement from the Pentagon that reversed a 2008 policy of President George W. Bush’s administration on older cluster munitions. That change allowed combatant commanders to once again use the weapons, which are known for often failing to detonate, leaving behind duds that pose dangers to civilians and United States troops alike.
“Reports that the White House intends to roll back the policy on anti-personnel land mines are of great concern,” Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, said in a statement. “As far as I am aware, no member of Congress has been consulted about this imminent announcement. The example we set has global ramifications.”
Mr. Leahy said he has asked the secretary of defense and chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to delay any decision until he can discuss it with them.
Jeff Abramson, a senior fellow with the Arms Control Association, said these land mines are “indiscriminate and disproportionately harm civilians, who make up the vast majority of land mine casualties.”
“Technical solutions to make land mines self-destruct or otherwise labeled as ‘smart’ have failed to work as advertised and been rejected by the 164 counties, including all U.S. NATO allies, that have joined the mine ban treaty,” he added.
The United States moved long ago to destroy its Cold-War stockpile of “dumb” anti-personnel mines, and has not produced any new anti-personnel mines in decades. From 1996 to 1998, the United States destroyed 3.3 million of its anti-personnel mines that did not comply with the Ottawa standard, although a 2002 report by the Government Accountability Office noted that the military still had approximately 1.5 million “dumb” and 8.8 million “smart” anti-personnel land mines remaining in its arsenal.
Research into self-destructing munitions has not yielded mines that are guaranteed to at some point render themselves safe, but that has not stopped defense contractors from trying. Officials at Picatinny Arsenal, an Army weapons research and development center in New Jersey, confirmed that as of October 2019, the service had paid $11.5 million to Northrop Grumman and $23.3 million to Textron Systems for the development of new anti-vehicle mines that comply with the Ottawa standard.
While the Defense Department’s efforts to create new mines grows, the State Department continues its work to rid the world of land mines that have outlived their wars and still threaten civilians.
Last year, the State Department said the United States had provided more than $3.4 billion to more than 100 countries since 1993 to assist with the removal of land mines and the destruction of other conventional munitions. According to the Landmine and Cluster Munition Monitor, which reports on compliance with the Ottawa Convention, 59 countries around the world still have land mines on their territory.