J. Lo’s Halftime Show and Body Image
To the Editor:
Re “I Feel Personally Judged by J. Lo’s Body,” by Jennifer Weiner (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Feb. 4):
I chose to judge J. Lo and the halftime show at the Super Bowl through a different lens. How does one reconcile the show with the #MeToo movement? To be sure, the technical aspects and performances were first rate. But keeping in mind that this is a show watched by all ages and backgrounds, the dance moves and costumes were more befitting a strip club minus the stripping or a prelude to a soft-porn video.
The show used images meant to excite and seduce. Yet the #MeToo movement is all about not objectifying women, not viewing them through the lens of sex and using sex to manipulate, dominate and take advantage.
The performers are wonderful dancers and good singers. How about costumes and choreography that showcase these talents without having to exploit the overused “sex sells” approach.
I was not offended by the show — just sad and dismayed.
Olivia Koppell
New York
To the Editor:
I was struck by how differently Jennifer Weiner reacted to Jennifer Lopez and Shakira’s performance than my friends and I did. Perhaps it is generational — my friends and I are a mix of genders and races in our mid to late 20s — but we focused very little on their appearances. We were more struck by the enthusiastic display of Latino culture and pride, capped by the unfurling of the Puerto Rico flag, at an event hosted by an organization that often ignores social issues concerning their minority players and viewers.
I understand the tension between celebrating women’s bodies versus using them to sell things. But it is sad to me that the actual message that J. Lo and Shakira were sending, a celebration of cultural diversity in a time of cultural division, was lost amid the focus on their bodies. Funny how we as a society seem incapable of moving beyond this issue.
Renée Wang
Pasadena, Calif.
To the Editor:
Jennifer Weiner’s opinion piece communicated the perception that men consume junk food with abandon and have no anxiety or feelings of inadequacy about what their bodies look like. I’m now in recovery from body dysmorphia and a related eating disorder, and it is exactly that perception that helped make it so difficult for me to admit I had an issue or to seek help.
Body image issues are not the sole domain of women. And guess what? They never have been. But we as men are often not encouraged to be open about also falling prey to these conditions. It’s truly a shame that the body acceptance that Ms. Weiner urged for those reading her article didn’t seem to extend to men also. We’re all in this together.
Nicholas Malfitano
Philadelphia
To the Editor:
I read Jennifer Weiner’s witty and honest reflections during my lunch break as a radiation oncologist. I had just seen two patients healing from mastectomies and another whose cheek had been significantly eroded by oral cancer. I doubt that they had lost sleep on how their thighs compared to J. Lo’s. Above all, they were grateful to have a chance of cure.
Ms. Weiner’s bittersweet piece made me wonder: How many waking hours of our short lives do we spend worrying about cosmetic “flaws”? If those insecurities creep up, please be kind to yourselves. Turn off your screens. Don’t wait for a life-changing crisis to realize what matters. Realize today that you are enough.
Sarah Squire
Winston-Salem, N.C.