Stressed Out
SUNDAY PUZZLE — Will Nediger is a welcome sight on a Sunday, and this puzzle is a typical example of his skillful eye, which focuses on a particular vagary of the English language and teases it into an entertaining theme. His last Times puzzle, back in August, was tongue twisters; today we have phrases that tripped me up in a subtler way but are still very fun.
According to Will Shortz’s print introduction, Mr. Nediger has had more Sunday puzzles in The Times than any other Canadian. He’s also a contributor to National Academic Quiz Tournaments, the source for quiz-bowl questions, and he edits a puzzle for Spyscape, a museum in New York that has a James Bond exhibit on now.
There’s a lot of quirk in the fill today — the whole top row counts, I think — and not a ton of real head-scratchers. It’s nice to ease into things, new year and all, so no complaints about difficulty here. I noticed the homophones today, like AIDE, HOAR, ERIE and LAPSE. (Are they in every puzzle? Probably so — it’s the Baader-Meinhof Phenomenon, I guess.) Other than ADU and ROEG, most of the names were deducible.
71A: TRY TO “remember, the kind of September” is an instant connection. I can’t even pretend to “forget” what those other lyrics could be.
118A: King Tupou VI took over in TONGA in 2012. The clue’s not technically wrong, but the longest-reigning Tupou was actually Queen Salote Tupou III, who held the reins from 1918 to 1965.
13D: With the South Pacific in mind, a “Samoa salesperson” could be a bit of stumper. If you’ve ever had one of these cookies you’ll probably lose a few minutes looking up when your local GIRL SCOUT brigade is presenting this year.
66D: One would think that to use one’s noodle might involve some thought, so think about all kinds of noodles, including POOL TOYS. Pool noodles go all the way back to 1980, which is surprising (and the PT CRUISER only existed in the 21st century).
95D: This is a debut, cute and unexpected. “Watched the kitty” sounds like a job you’d have at a casino or poker night rather than someone’s apartment, where the kitty emerges from under the bed to eat, drink and attack your ankles when you least expect it — you’ve probably experienced similar if you’ve ever CATSAT.
There are eight theme entries running across today, at 23, 38, 47, 66, 86, 94 and 111. They are all examples of heteronyms, which are a subset of the wide-ranging family of homonyms — words that are frequently fodder for word games (and the nightmares of English language learners). There’s also a capitonym, which is a variety of heteronyms. (Remember this! There will be a quiz in August.)
As long as you’re sure of your answer, these theme entries are really of moderate difficulty, but the premier example was tough, because the “Johannes” that I know is either Brahms or Burg, and even after getting the entire first word in the phrase PROJECT GUTENBERG I was flummoxed. I know the site, which is an excellent repository of free books and an important component of the early internet (and before — the mission dates to 1971). As a human who owes her main livelihood to actual printing presses, spacing on Johannes Gutenberg himself is a bit embarrassing.
So, if you interpret the clue at 23A correctly, you’ll be reminded of a drama club buzzword that comes up in community and club meetings, recitals and anywhere a person who doesn’t enunciate and modulate their vocals like Ethel Merman suffers greatly. We’re told to “pro-JECT! pro-JECT! We can’t hear you!” And so you have the trick today — we’re looking for those words that look the same but have more than one pronunciation, and more than one meaning.
All of the words in question are common, and all are two-syllable (I deliberated over this and shall deliberately avoid being definitive, but there are hardly any examples of longer words that fit this pattern). I am still mildly amazed at how hard it is for my brain to cleanly navigate the difference between the two identical words (PROJECT, long O, and PROJECT, rhyme with “Ah, sect”) without sort of murmuring them both to myself. The phrases and terms that work with both pronunciations (and meanings) to form the actual entry are all quite well known as well.
So, for 38A, as long as you know a little Sondheim (this is a classic, and it’s coming back to Broadway quite soon), you can come up with PRESENT, as in put on, COMPANY. For 66A, “workers at the sticker factory” PRODUCE those little sticky origin identifiers that come on oranges and avocados: PRODUCE LABELS.
The capitonym is at the bottom: CONVERSE, ALL STARS! Talk among yourselves, perhaps while wearing “Chuck Taylors.” A capitonym requires a change in capitalization — from “converse” to “Converse,” in this case, although they don’t always need a change in pronunciation (who’s eating turkey in Turkey?).
Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
What did you think?