Sign in the Bleachers
MONDAY PUZZLE — Far be it from me to suggest that a constructor might create a puzzle that appeals directly to the crosswords editor Will Shortz for personal reasons, but sometimes I feel like a given puzzle might have been created to appeal directly to Mr. Shortz for personal reasons. That doesn’t mean that the puzzle isn’t enjoyable; it’s just a thing I’ve noticed. And for some reason, it never fails to make me smile.
It’s no secret that Mr. Shortz is passionate about table tennis, for example, and we have seen a few puzzles that were table tennis themed. Mr. Shortz probably feels as if there have been enough of those, so what else could a constructor base a puzzle on that would really make the editor take notice? Let’s see, what else do people associate with Mr. Shortz?
Oh, I know: He has that MOUSTACHE.
Timothy Polin is back, and I want him to know that I’m just kidding. I don’t really think he made this puzzle to get into Mr. Shortz’s good graces. But if you are going to try, this is not a bad way to do it.
17A. A BOLA is considered to be a primitive weapon used for hunting by South American tribes, and it consisted of stone balls, “usually in a group of three, attached to long, slender ropes.” They are still in use, and can sometimes be made with metal balls.
24D. Wordplay alert! “A mother in a stable family?” sounds like commentary on how the family is doing, but it’s not. A MARE lives in a stable and is of breeding age, so she could be a mother.
47D. It’s clue/answer pairings such as this one — “Cry from a person in peril”/SAVE ME — that get me thinking about George Carlin’s rant on things you never see, like a hero in a movie saying “Do what you want to the girl, but leave me alone!”
So, MOUSTACHES.
Mr. Polin offers us a set of four fictional villains, all of whom possess what the revealer clue at 60A calls ”Archetypically villainous features.” (Please note that I am not suggesting that Mr. Shortz is villainous just because he has a MOUSTACHE.)
Of these four villains, SNIDELY WHIPLASH makes his debut, and DR. FU MANCHU returns after nearly 30 years, possibly because the character is now seen as a racist caricature. The portrayal of the character was indeed racist (and all the actors who played him were white men made up in “yellow-face”), but maybe it is in here because the FU MANCHU is a type of MOUSTACHE on its own.
In nontheme news, I liked the long Down entries, especially the symmetrical ROCKY ROAD and WINE SAUCE, which definitely don’t go together, but are each delicious on their own.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
Your thoughts?