In Retirement, They Help Immigrants Find Their Way in New York
It has been four decades since Maher Gendy arrived in New York from his native Egypt, yet the memories of his struggles to adjust to a new country, a new city and a new language remain vivid.
“When I came here, I didn’t know much English,” Mr. Gendy, 67, said. “I didn’t know how to take the subway.
His wife, Salwa, recalls feeling adrift herself after leaving her family and friends behind in Cairo to settle with him in Queens in 1987. When the couple retired three years ago and began searching for volunteer opportunities, it made sense for them to find a way to help new immigrants — particularly members of their Coptic Orthodox church — adjust to life in the United States.
A path presented itself in 2016 at a fair at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, where both Gendys were working at the time. Ms. Gendy met representatives from the Community Service Society, one of the seven organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. They signed up to volunteer for the society’s Advocacy, Counseling and Entitlement Services Project, which helps low-income New Yorkers get access to benefits to which they are entitled.
The Gendys, who live in Fresh Meadows, Queens, base their volunteerism at St. Mary and St. Antonios Coptic Orthodox Church in Ridgewood, where they have been members for more than 30 years. Membership at the church increased significantly after the fall of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in 2011. The subsequent rise of the Muslim Brotherhood prompted many Copts — members of the country’s Orthodox Christian minority — to flee for the United States.
“We love to see people who are new people, new immigrants, because they don’t know anything — they need guidance,” Ms. Gendy, 58, said. “Those are the people we really focus on.”
The Gendys retired in late 2016 and began their volunteer work the following year. Using an office at the back of the church’s first floor, they help members of the congregation sign up for public benefits, health insurance and financial aid.
“It’s a problem if you don’t know how to speak the language of where you live,” Ms. Gendy said. “The community rejects you, too.”
Although they volunteer two days a week at the church, “we’re open 24/7,” Mr. Gendy said.
The couple share their personal phone numbers with the people they help, some of whom have called from hospitals after running into a language barrier. The Gendys also manage a Facebook group where they post job opportunities.
“We give them hope that everything is going to be O.K.,” Mr. Gendy said.
Across from their office, which they share with members of the clergy, sits a library where the Gendys lead English lessons and study sessions for the United States citizenship test.
The Gendys partnered with Workforce 1, a city-run career service, last year to provide church members with job training. The couple also review résumés and offer interviewing tips.
“I feel so happy when someone gets a job,” Ms. Gendy said. “I’m doing what I can do to help them.”
Mr. and Ms. Gendy were both born in Cairo. Mr. Gendy came to New York in 1979 after completing his military service. He was granted citizenship in 1982 and started working as an office aide at Lincoln Hospital.
He joined St. Mary and St. Antonios Coptic Orthodox Church after his sister invited him to services.
Mr. Gendy continued to visit Cairo to see family and friends. On one of his trips, in 1985, he met Salwa after they were set up by relatives. They married in 17 days.
Ms. Gendy joined her husband in New York in 1987 after working as a teacher and a chemist for Egypt’s Ministry of Health and Population. She later received a master’s degree in chemistry from Queens College.
Both were interested in the medical field, and they ended up working together when Ms. Gendy was hired as a lab assistant at Lincoln Hospital in 1989. Mr. Gendy retired as a hospital controller in August 2016; Ms. Gendy retired as a lab supervisor two months later.
After 34 years of marriage, Ms. Gendy said she valued her husband’s wisdom. Mr. Gendy said his wife made him a better, more religious person.

Their faith compelled them to start volunteering. “Being in the church gives you that feeling that you have to help others,” Mr. Gendy said. “It’s inside of us.”
The couple, who do not have children, wanted a fulfilling post-retirement life. Ms. Gendy considers the church members they have helped to be their children.
The Gendys each receive $3 for each day they volunteer, or about $240 per year, from The Neediest Cases Fund to offset some of their transportation costs, said Rebecca Haase, who directs the financial advocacy program for the Community Service Society. The couple have had more than 1,250 appointments with people since they started volunteering, and they have helped 487 people in 2019, Ms. Haase said.
Beyond volunteering, they are active members of the church. Mr. Gendy serves as a deacon, and he and Ms. Gendy lead a program that teaches young people about respect, church etiquette and volunteerism.
Ms. Gendy compares the work she and her husband do to watering a plant: They help people build a solid foundation, but then it is up to them to grow in their professional and personal lives.
“When you are introduced to these people, maybe at the beginning you have no feelings about them,” Ms. Gendy said. “But then, when you get in touch with them, and you see their needs and how good they are, they touch you.”