In Age Bias Case, Justices Discuss ‘O.K. Boomer’ and Eggless Cakes
WASHINGTON — In a lively Supreme Court argument on Wednesday about what older federal workers must show to prove age discrimination, the justices were unusually engaged. Perhaps that was because they are themselves older federal workers, albeit ones with life tenure.
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., who is 64, asked whether a supervisor’s use of the phrase “O.K., boomer” could be evidence of age discrimination.
Justice Stephen G. Breyer, 81, wanted to know whether an employer could say, “I certainly don’t want people who are over the age of 82.”
The case before the court, Babb v. Wilkie, No. 18-882, concerned Noris Babb, a pharmacist who said she was denied promotions, benefits and training opportunities by the Department of Veterans Affairs at least partly because of her age.
Had she worked in the private sector or for a state or local government, she would have had to prove that her age was a determining reason for the denials — a “but for” cause in the legal jargon. The question for the justices was whether federal workers can win age discrimination suits under a more relaxed standard, showing only that age was one factor among many leading to a negative employment determination.
Justice Elena Kagan, 59, explained the difference between the two standards.
“There are two kinds of concepts you can use,” she said. “They are: Did this thing actually cause the firing or the lack of promotion? Or was this thing around when they made that decision?”
The words of the relevant law, said Roman Martinez, a lawyer for Dr. Babb, allowed her to sue under the relaxed standard. The law says that “all personnel actions affecting employees or applicants for employment who are at least 40 years of age” shall be “made free from any discrimination based on age.”
If the process for making an employment decision uses age as a negative factor, Mr. Martinez said, quoting the law, “it’s not ‘made free from any discrimination.’ ”
The chief justice’s question about a stray if stinging remark of “O.K., Boomer" — a dismissive retort used by younger people — was meant to test the limits of Mr. Martinez’s argument. “So calling somebody a ‘boomer’ and considering them for a position would be actionable?” Chief Justice Roberts asked.
Mr. Martinez stood his ground. If a jury “were to conclude that that statement was one of the factors going into this decision,” he said, “I think it absolutely would be covered” by the age discrimination law.
That approach, Chief Justice Roberts said, would have negative consequences. “Your position is going to become, really, just a regulation of speech in the workplace,” he told Mr. Martinez.
Solicitor General Noel J. Francisco, arguing for the federal government, said the court should focus on how the challenged employment action was ultimately made and not on factors that did not end up playing a role.
He proposed an analogy. Assume, he said, that there were a law requiring that “all cakes shall be made free from the use of any eggs.”
“In the course of the cake baking process, I whisk up a bowl of eggs,” he went on, before discarding them.
“I have made a cake free from the use of any eggs, notwithstanding my use of eggs in the cake baking process,” Mr. Francisco said, “because the final cake that I have baked is free from the use of eggs.”
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., 69, was skeptical, saying that approach was hard to square with the words of the law. “But what if there is a little bit of egg that’s put in the final batter?” he asked. “I have a terrible time fitting your argument into the statutory language.”
Justice Breyer said there was good reason to think the federal government should be easier to sue for job discrimination than other employers.
“The feds should be the leader in this,” he said. “Who fought more than any group of people for freedom from discrimination? Look at history. It was the federal government, and they should be holier than thou.”