Australian Open: Matches to Watch on Saturday Night (Into Sunday)
Novak Djokovic, the defending champion, is the most decorated singles player in the history of the Australian Open. With seven titles in Melbourne, beginning in 2008, Djokovic is at home on the hardcourts Down Under. The world No. 2, he has galloped toward his eighth Australian Open title, and looks in excellent form. He skated past Roger Federer in the semifinal, winning in straight sets, on his quest to match Federer’s record of 20 Grand Slam titles.
Djokovic has been described by his coach, Marian Vajda, as being unsatisfied with keeping still. Vajda said, “It seems that the things are perfect, but suddenly he wants to change in some way.” Djokovic is always striving to better himself, committed to experimentation. To Djokovic, “stagnation is regression.” It’s hard to find any signs of stagnation in him. After struggling with injuries in 2017, he won two Grand Slam titles in 2018, and another pair in 2019. He seems well on his way to add another Australian Open trophy to his shelf.
Dominic Thiem, the fourth seed, fought his way to this third Grand Slam final appearance by showing a level of adaptability that is reminiscent of Djokovic’s. In the quarterfinals, against Rafael Nadal, Thiem played with a lower slice that moved Nadal around the court, keeping him from using his powerful topspin shots. In the semifinal against Alexander Zverev, Thiem rushed the net more frequently, keeping points shorter, and pressuring Zverev to either go for bigger shots or be broken down by Thiem’s ability to move him from corner to corner in an advanced position.
Thiem has emerged as the biggest threat to the Big Three over the last four years. He’s the only player within the last four years to beat Rafael Nadal three times on clay, Roger Federer on every surface, and Novak Djokovic more than three times anywhere. But there is a mental hurdle to pass here. In his on-court interview after the semifinal, Thiem referenced his two losses to Nadal in the finals of the French Open saying, “I’m always facing the kings of a Grand Slam in the final.”
At the end of two weeks of top-level tennis, fitness may be an issue, especially for Thiem who has had one fewer day of rest between matches. There will be the question of nerves: Will Djokovic be concerned at the prospect of a changing of the guard happening before he can catch up to the Grand Slam record, or will Thiem struggle to relax when playing a man who has never lost an Australian Open final?
No matter the outcome, this match will be terrific. Both players are considered among the best returners and movers on the tour. Expect long rallies and battles for court position as the two use their variability to try to disrupt their opponent’s rhythm.
Max Purcell and Luke Saville started 2019 both ranked outside of the top 100 doubles players in the world. After playing on the challenger tour, the minor leagues of world tennis, and winning seven titles, they were granted a wild card into this year’s Australian Open. The Australian pair have had a surprising run of form, beating the fourth and eighth seeds on their way to the final. The hometown heroes will be hoping to be the first Australians to win the men’s doubles title in Melbourne since 1997.
On the other side of the net, Rajeev Ram and Joe Salisbury, the 11th seeds, are also entering their first men’s doubles final at a Grand Slam, but come with slightly more experience. Ram won the mixed doubles title in Melbourne last year, and, together, Ram and Salisbury qualified for the ATP Tour Finals in 2019.
For all four players, this may be a once in a lifetime opportunity. Expect to see some nerves, especially from Ram and Salisbury, who will have trouble dealing with a pair of Australians whose game has seemed to only get better as the tournament has progressed.