Hired to Tame Horses, She Bonded With the People, Too
HALF BROKE
A Memoir
By Ginger Gaffney
“Most of my days are filled with teaching horses how to feel comfortable in the world of humans,” Ginger Gaffney writes in “Half Broke,” a memoir that is her first book. “But my secret truth is that I love their world more.”
Gaffney, a seasoned horse trainer in northern New Mexico, gets a call out of the blue one day from a nearby ranch that is run as an alternative to incarceration. The ranch has a small herd of horses cared for by a livestock crew, with the aim of instilling work skills, but the horses have been harshly treated. One has been severely wounded in an accident, and they have been running wild and attacking people. Gaffney has never heard the kinds of stories she’s told over the phone. What she finds on the ranch is a group of damaged people and a group of damaged horses. The book documents a year and a half of finding deep connection and even communion with both.
The residents, most of whom are men and come from generations of poverty, addiction and incarceration, apply from prison to finish their sentences on the ranch. “Most have missing teeth,” Gaffney observes, “and tattoos drawn up their necks, next to their eyes, scrolled across their foreheads.” Everyone, she writes, “has lived a life of trouble.” She is greeted by nearly all the residents with skepticism at first; one asks her sneeringly, “You some kind of whisperer?”
Well, yes.
Gaffney has a breathtaking and at times nearly otherworldly ability to read horses by closely studying their bodies, and then to capture what she sees with her prose. “The slightest movement — a flick of an ear, a shortening of breath — is how a horse will try to communicate,” she writes, describing what she calls “subtle language.” Perhaps even more remarkable is that she also can see the humans through the horses’ eyes: “Fear and its family members — anger, frustration, pain — are all carried in the residents’ steps, in their shoulders and necks, the way their backs round forward, forcing them to look out through the tips of their eyes, hiding in the shadows just beneath their eyebrows.” They are, she says, are “unknowingly communicating their pain to the horses.”
The vulnerability of the residents and their existence at the margins of society make for a conundrum in their portrayal. Gaffney says in an author’s note that some characters are composites. In journalism, there is a bright line between making a character less identifiable for reasons of safety or privacy — using just a first name, not using a name at all, removing identifying details — and the creation of composite characters from elements of real people. Memoir is not journalism, but since the mode of this book is one of intimate observation, the use of composite characters feels a little dismaying; if you read that author’s note and then follow along as Gaffney draws characters like Tony, Randy, Eliza and Joey with tremendous sensitivity and sympathy, it brings you up short to realize that in fact there may be no Joey, the defeated young man who forms a bond with the wounded horse, Luna, after she watches him rescue a litter of feral kittens. (We can assume — or can we? — that the horses, at least, are not composites.)
Gaffney surely feels an obligation to people who had no idea, when the horse trainer came to the ranch where they were serving a prison sentence, that their every angry outburst, every crying jag, every moment of breakthrough or failure might appear years later in a book. She may well have had to assure some people she would not write about them, or others that they would not be recognizable, in order to tell climactic stories — like when most of the livestock crew must leave the ranch, returning to prison or to a fugitive life on the street, after they violate the ranch rules prohibiting drugs and sex; or when the wounded Luna transforms into a deeply trusting creature.
A gift for documenting infinitesimal gradations of fear, anger or sheer sensory joy animates Gaffney’s scenes of the interactions of the residents and the horses, as well as some of the episodes in her own life she relates, like the workshop she attended 15 years earlier, taught by a world-famous trainer, at which she was the only woman. Assigned to work with a young filly who wasn’t yet ready for the saddle, Gaffney followed the famous trainer’s instructions, despite her own instincts, and both she and the horse ended up injured. “I wish I had fought harder for what I knew,” she writes. “Ginger, I tell myself, next time you will.”
But the book moves sometimes disjointedly between these deeply perceptive parts and Gaffney’s emphasis on what she describes as her own brokenness. “I don’t often feel as if I belong,” she writes, recounting her “extreme childhood shyness” and how she would not speak until she was 6; how she felt herself to be a “genderless thing”; how her first lesbian relationship, in high school, was ended by her mother’s discovery of her girlfriend’s letters, and how lost and isolated she felt for a long time after that. It is brave to examine these aspects of herself. But it’s hard not to wonder whether alienation is perhaps just a bit overstated for the sake of empathizing with the ranch residents, from whom Gaffney is, after all, fundamentally different: She has a home with a loving longtime partner; a fulfilling and meaningful career; the ability to speak and act with authority. The passages that center her own sense of self can sap the momentum of the narrative that takes place on the ranch.
That’s because you can’t help wanting Gaffney to stay with the horses, with her truly transcendent writing about them and their world, honoring them as creatures with exquisitely refined and attuned senses, and a silent yet visible language that will reward those who learn to read it. It’s an elegant elaboration on the idea put forth by the animal scientist Temple Grandin in her 2005 best-selling book, “Animals in Translation”: “I do know people can learn to ‘talk’ to animals, and to hear what animals have to say, better than they do now. I also know that a lot of times people who can talk to animals are happier than people who can’t.”
For Gaffney, and then for the ranch residents, this becomes nothing less than a creed. Where did she learn this for herself? She reaches back in memory to her first horse, Belle. “I was shocked when I first saw her,” she writes. “She looked crazed, untamable, as if she’d seen a demon.” But slowly Gaffney finds that Belle is not unreachable at all, that in fact her whole body is broadcasting to anyone who will only tune in. “This is how she began to teach me her language. That her hooves, her mouth, her brain were all connected down and over the long, lovely line of her body. Her legs were sentences that ended at each hoof. Her body needed the touch of the earth to be heard. I began to see every movement she made as a long paragraph, a story, a way to understand each other. I learned,” she writes, quietly but with stirring conviction, “to listen with my eyes.”