Growing Up in the Margins Without Being Marginalized
SALTWATER
By Jessica Andrews

We first meet Lucy Bailey in a rough stone cottage on the northwest coast of Ireland, although we don’t learn her last name until the final pages of this often gorgeous first novel by Jessica Andrews. Lucy’s grandfather has died and left his house to Lucy and her mother, Susie, with whom she is newly estranged. Lucy is also newly graduated from a British university, too soon in her estimation. Her years in London have renovated her northern English vowels, taught her to push the ‘‘‘ewk’ out of ‘bewk,’” but they’ve left her wobbly, untethered from her working-class beginnings. She feels shut out by the city’s predacious, moneyed tribes, battered by its “impenetrable shapes” and “fierce elbows.”
Mother and daughter scour the moldy, vermin-infested cottage together, singing songs by the Ronettes and the Shangri-Las, setting its rotting contents on fire in a spectacular three-day pyre. Then Lucy’s mother flies home, “even though things were still not right between us.” Lucy is too broke to go anywhere else, and anyway the pace of this rural, clannish Donegal village and its raw, stinging climate (along with a salubrious affair) suit her purposes. It’s the right spot from which to look back and interrogate her precarious upbringing, her tricky maternal and paternal legacies.
Broken, unreliable men are the family’s inheritance. Lucy’s grandfather liked to hit the pub after work and then rage once he got home, hurling gravy boats and cans of food while Lucy’s grandmother locked her two daughters in the bathroom or whisked them out of the house to wait out the drink.
Lucy has grown up in the margins, in the taut silences between her mother and her drunken, hapless father, Tom, an erratic wreck of a man whom she nevertheless adores. When he came home in a good mood, singing songs and dancing as her mother worked, elbowing him out of the way as she tried to make tea, Lucy was elated, though it was her mother who, she admits, “was left to tie our shoelaces and wash our dirty clothes, while he drifted in and out on the wind.”
But the catastrophically alcoholic Tom wasn’t the only destabilizing force in the household. Lucy’s brother, Josh, was born with holes in his heart. Mysteriously and magically, they disappeared after a visit to a faith healer, but then Josh was found to be deaf. Although Susie and Lucy learned sign language, Tom signed up for a computer course instead. Later, they used their signing skills to talk around him. Was it safe for Lucy to entreat her father to play or should she “leave him be and let him crawl into bed with a stink in his hair?”
Lucy’s brother was given a cochlear implant, but his disabilities frustrated and inflamed him; his tantrums were operatic and destructive. When he was sent to a special boarding school, he ran away. At home, he smashed his toys while Lucy and her mother hid in the kitchen. “Lovely Lucy,” her mother sighed, “you’re our hope.”
As a teenager, Lucy was precocious, sensuous and questing, shiny with lip gloss and hormones. She wore crop tops and sequined skirts, and loved the triple surges of drugs, drink and dancing, though she was determined to stay on track in school. (She always remembered to pack her sixth-form polo shirt in case a party lasted all night, already an outlier as she picked her way over empty beer bottles and sleeping bodies, ready to make her way to the two buses that would take her to class.)
Her school was another in-between place, stuck in a grim landscape of council houses and high-rise tower blocks with “a big brutalist shopping center where mams pushed prams in velour tracksuits and babies with snotty noses and frilly socks clutched sausage rolls like pasty pastry angels.”
Andrews unspools Lucy’s coming-of-age story in short numbered fragments, prose poems that at first seem random and out of order, but build in a logical sequence all their own. The technique isn’t always successful and the flurry of pop cultural name checks can read like a confounding shorthand — especially the overwhelming array of bands and singers. But more often Andrews’s writing is transportingly voluptuous, conjuring tastes and smells and sounds like her literary godmother, Edna O’Brien. Lucy notes “the wet sulk of chips” in the school cafeteria; “the sticky hoppy thrill” of breaking open a stolen keg of beer; and how the “posh girl skin” of her university classmates is “expensive and gold,” making her “dizzy with want.”
Adrift in London, Lucy finds herself “full of ideas but they didn’t seem to be the right ones.” Her privileged classmates, with their expensive clothes and Moleskine notebooks, “had quotations pursed between their lips like peregrine fruits.” Inspired by a creative writing assignment, she turns in an essay on Ai Weiwei’s millions of porcelain sunflower seeds, which she’s seen at the Tate Modern, but the professor gives her an F, scrawling “Your prose is purple” at the top. What does it mean? she asks a new friend. “Haven’t a clue, mate,” the friend replies, stung by her own bad grade.
Andrews, now in her late 20s, is a poet, a podcaster and co-editor of The Grapevine, a journal dedicated to publishing work by those who have been marginalized in the arts, particularly women, people of color, nonbinary artists and “those who identify as working class.” Like Lucy, she grew up in northern England. She has a deaf brother. She studied English literature at King’s College in London, and, like Lucy, struggled to connect with the experiences of her classmates. It’s her mission, she has said, to tell the stories of working-class women. That’s a fine undertaking, but what makes her novel sing is its universal themes: how a young woman tries to make sense of her world, and how she grows up.