Iran, Philippines Volcano, Oscar Nominees: Your Monday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey has dropped out of the presidential race.
Security forces fired on protesters in Tehran on Sunday, the second day of demonstrations after Iran’s military, citing human error, acknowledged firing the missiles that brought down a passenger jet last week.
Iran’s admission after days of denials has limited the international blowback but created a domestic political crisis that has overshadowed the confrontation with the U.S., at least for now.
Watch: Our video team reconstructed what we know about the jet’s seven-minute flight. Among the 176 victims were 57 Canadians, several of whom were students or faculty members at the University of Alberta.
Related: Defense Secretary Mark Esper said on Sunday that he had not seen specific evidence that Iran was planning to attack four U.S. Embassies, contradicting President Trump. It was the latest shift in the administration’s evolving explanation for the strike that killed a top Iranian general.
Closer look: Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani’s name may not have been well-known to most Americans, but he had long been a focus of anger for wounded veterans and families of those killed in Iraq.
Another angle: Kimia Alizadeh, the only female athlete to win an Olympic medal for Iran, announced over the weekend that she had defected because of “hypocrisy, lies, injustice and flattery.”
In 2002, Mr. Biden was one of 77 senators to authorize President George W. Bush’s use of military force in Iraq, a vote that has exposed Mr. Biden to criticism from rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination.
A Times review of that vote, which Mr. Biden later called a mistake, found that it was characteristic of his record as a deal-maker, one with a deep respect for compromise that his supporters admire and that critics say has colored his judgment.
Another angle: Part of Mr. Trump’s campaign message in 2016 was a vow to end what he called America’s “reckless, interventionist globalism.” But with the specter of a conflict with Iran, he risks becoming the wartime president he has said he never wanted to be.
Related: Elizabeth Warren said on Sunday that she was disappointed over a suggestion by Bernie Sanders’s campaign that her appeal was limited to highly educated voters. The two candidates are among six who have qualified for the Democratic debate on Tuesday.
The rape trial of Harvey Weinstein that began last week in Manhattan is one of few such cases in U.S. courts involving accusations recent enough to result in criminal charges.
As a result, those who are unable to pursue such cases are embracing defamation lawsuits. This year, verdicts are expected in defamation cases involving President Trump, the Senate candidate Roy Moore and the actor Johnny Depp.
Closer look: The suits are being brought because the statutes of limitations on sexual misconduct can be as short as one year. Defamation cases are also a go-to strategy for accused men trying to preserve their reputations.
The Times analyzed popular social studies textbooks used in California and Texas and found hundreds of differences, with content sometimes diverging in ways that reflect deep partisan divides.
In one example, an annotated Bill of Rights in a California textbook explains that rulings on the Second Amendment have allowed for some gun regulations. In the same place, the Texas edition of the textbook, above, contains only blank space.
Impeachment trial: President Trump suggested that senators should dismiss the House’s charges against him outright rather than dignifying them with a full trial. Mr. Trump doesn’t have a direct say in how the Senate proceeds, and a trial could begin as soon as Wednesday.
Morning commute disrupted: A water main break in New York shut down several subway lines today and flooded a swath of the Upper West Side around Lincoln Center.
Truce in Libya: A cease-fire brokered by Turkey and Russia stoked fragile hopes for an end to months of foreign-backed fighting around Tripoli.
Rebuke to Beijing: The re-election of President Tsai Ing-wen of Taiwan, who vowed to defend the island’s sovereignty, dealt a blow to China’s government.
Emergency meeting for British royals: Queen Elizabeth II and her family are scheduled to have a discussion today about the future of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, who announced that they planned to “step back” from royal duties. Here’s how things got to this point.
Nuclear threat that wasn’t: A cellphone alert about an “incident” at a nuclear power plant in Ontario, Canada’s most populous province, was sent in error, according to another alert sent about 90 minutes later.
The Weekly: The latest episode of The Times’s TV show is about the youngest person to get breakthrough gene therapy for sickle cell disease. Read behind-the-scenes notes about the episode, which is available on FX and Hulu.
Snapshot: Above, lightning strikes surrounding a column of ash from the Taal volcano in the Philippines. After the volcano’s eruption prompted mass evacuations, officials today urged desperate residents not to return to their homes.
Tortoise and the heirs: Diego, a giant tortoise from the Galápagos, helped save his species by fathering 40 percent of the offspring in a breeding program.
N.F.L. playoffs: The conference championship field is set, after the Titans pulled off a stunning upset, the Chiefs won in a blowout, the 49ers got healthy and the Packers survived a comeback attempt.
Milestone for Serena Williams: The tennis star won her first singles title since giving birth in 2017. “It feels good,” she said. “It’s been a long time.”
Oscar nominees: “Joker” led the Academy Award nominations with 11, including for best picture.
Popular reads: The New York Public Library system has compiled the 10 most checked-out books in its history. No. 1 on the list: “The Snowy Day,” a picture book by Ezra Jack Keats.
Metropolitan Diary: In this week’s column, friends at the ’47 World Series, a windy Manhattan day and more reader tales of New York City.
What we’re listening to: This interview with the journalist Ronan Farrow on the “Armchair Expert” podcast. Melina Delkic of the briefings team writes: “You’re surely familiar with the journalist’s award-winning investigation of Harvey Weinstein, but the way his life story and background contribute to his reporting adds fascinating context.”
Cook: Vegan mac and cheese is a simple stovetop pasta.
Watch: The HBO series “The New Pope,” starring John Malkovich, starts today. Here’s our review.
Listen: We compiled a playlist of 10 essential tracks from Neil Peart, the Rush drummer and lyricist who died last week at 67.
Smarter Living: Thinking about a cruise? You can snap up savings and better accommodations by booking between January and March.
A recent photograph in The Times has come to symbolize the destruction wrought by wildfires in Australia. Matthew Abbott, a photographer based there, was vacationing with his family the day he accepted an assignment and took the picture. Here is an edited excerpt from his account of how it happened.
The fire that hit Lake Conjola was one of the biggest. So I headed there on the highway.
It was mayhem. People were clearly frightened. Some had their possessions with them. Down the road, in Conjola Park, every house was burning.
In the town of Lake Conjola, there was a stretch of about four or five homes, with one engulfed in flames. The neighbors on each side were trying to hose down their own houses. They were using their shirts as masks, because there was smoke everywhere.
A little after 1 p.m., a power line to the burning house fell. It was then that I saw a group of kangaroos coming up the middle of the road, obviously running from another fire. And one ran right between me and the house.
I remembered thinking, “Yeah got it, good shot,” but I never allow myself to get too excited about a photo in the middle of something.
A photojournalist is trying to tell the story with pictures, and you need a series of strong images. You’re looking to document everything. So I kept moving.