The Push for Witnesses at the Impeachment Trial
To the Editor:
Re “Money to Ukraine Tied to Inquiries, Bolton Book Says” (front page, Jan. 27):
Your report of the contents of John Bolton’s book is a game changer. The impeachment trial is not the same as a judicial trial in which jurors are instructed not to consider any information that has not been formally received in evidence. Therefore, senator-jurors are free to consider the Times report as evidence against the president, without Mr. Bolton’s having actually testified.
If the president’s supporters refuse to call Mr. Bolton to testify in person, clearly they are afraid to cross-examine him. Moreover, if they refuse to call other witnesses who might have been able to contradict the accounts in Mr. Bolton’s book, the president’s team would be tacitly admitting that what Mr. Bolton asserts in his book is true.
Malcolm M. Gaynor
Chicago
To the Editor:
Re “John Roberts Can Call Witnesses to Trump’s Trial. Will He?,” by Neal K. Katyal, Joshua A. Geltzer and Mickey Edwards (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Jan. 27):
Please, Chief Justice Roberts, we implore you! If the majority of Americans, including the majority of Republicans, want witnesses and relevant documents included in the impeachment trial, you can exercise your power to make it happen. Please do this service to the American people!
James G. Goodale
Fort Myers, Fla.
To the Editor:
Re “Recording Is Said to Show Trump Ousted Envoy” (front page, Jan. 25):
President Trump has denied knowing Lev Parnas, saying maybe there’s a picture of them together because, well, he has his picture taken with a lot of people. Of course, multiple photos of them together have materialized. But now we have a recording of Mr. Trump telling Mr. Parnas and an associate to “take out” the ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch.
I’m curious: Is it typical for American presidents to order complete strangers to remove American ambassadors?
Peter Zheutlin
Dover, Mass.
To the Editor:
Dear Americans,
Listen carefully. If you were to remove the ad hominem attacks in Donald Trump’s defense, what remains?
Erika Monahan
Albuquerque
To the Editor:
Re “Key G.O.P. Senators Display Few Hints of Being Swayed” (front page, Jan. 25):
The statements of Republican senators, such as Lindsey Graham, that the Senate proceedings “became mind-numbing after a while” reveal less about the content or persuasiveness of the Democratic managers’ arguments than they do about the willfully limited attention spans and closed-mindedness of those same Republican senators.
Tracey Peterson
West Hills, Calif.
To the Editor:
Forgive me if I don’t think the Republicans’ faux outrage over Adam Schiff’s “head on a pike” comment is worthy of anything other than contempt. Where has their outrage been over President Trump’s attempt to extort the struggling nation of Ukraine, his cozying up to the world’s worst dictators, his stroking of white nationalists, and on and on.
Whether or not Mr. Trump made the widely reported “head on a pike” comment, it is well known that he and Mitch McConnell have communicated that same threat to the Republicans in Congress. They all know that if they step out of line, they will be shunned by the party leadership, who will do everything they can to end the political careers of those who chose country over party.
Americans have a long list of things to be outraged about. Mr. Schiff’s eloquent closing argument is not one of them.
David Baldwin
Petaluma, Calif.