Iowa Will Have 4 Sets of Results. Here’s How The Times Will Declare a Winner.
This year, the results of the Iowa caucuses will be reported differently. That could create confusion for readers, muddle the outcome and allow multiple candidates to claim victory.
The change has already created an additional challenge for news media organizations: how to project and characterize the outcome of a caucus that will now have four different results.
In the past, there was just one measurement of the outcome in Iowa: the estimated number of state delegates won by each candidate, known as “state delegate equivalents.” Whoever won the most state delegate equivalents was the winner, and that was that. In the 2016 caucuses, Hillary Clinton was declared the winner with 701 state delegate equivalents to 697 for Bernie Sanders.
This year, Iowa Democrats will release more information on the preferences of Iowa caucusgoers. They will show the vote choice of caucusgoers when they initially show up at their precincts. They will also release the tabulated vote count of the so-called final alignment, which happens after caucusgoers who support “nonviable” candidates (usually those with less than 15 percent of the vote) have an opportunity to switch their support to viable ones.
There is no guarantee that one candidate will sweep all of these measures. There’s also no guarantee that the winner by these measures will win the most pledged delegates to the Democratic National Convention, which for the first time will be bound to the caucus results in Iowa and will therefore be newly available on caucus night as well.
The New York Times will project the winner on the basis of the state delegate equivalency results, as it has in the past. These results are the basis for awarding pledged delegates to the Democratic National Convention, and the Democratic nominating process is ultimately a contest for pledged delegates. Most other news outlets, including The Associated Press, will do so as well.
There will be four results on caucus night, each corresponding to a different step in the delegate selection process. All will be available on the Times website, though only the state delegate equivalency results will be used to characterize the winner:
Could a different candidate win each step? The answer is yes.
A candidate could fare better on second alignment than on the first if he or she is the second choice of the caucusgoers who initially support nonviable candidates.
The same candidate could fall behind in state delegate equivalency, losing out to a person who fares best in precincts with low caucus turnout, typically in rural and older areas. (The number of state delegate equivalents is based on turnout in recent elections, so if a precinct has lower turnout in the caucus relative to those recent elections, a candidate will get more state delegate equivalents per caucusgoer than in a precinct with relatively high caucus turnout.)
And the winner of state delegate equivalents might not win the most pledged delegates in any number of arcane ways, whether because of rounding or because of the 15 percent threshold for earning delegates in a district.
The Times will characterize the winner of the state delegate equivalency results as the Iowa winner, regardless of whether that candidate wins the other measures.
While there is room for debate, the state delegate equivalency results prevail for a few reasons:
A campaign that prevails by another measure will undoubtedly have a case of its own. Many of those arguments may be compelling. They may be particularly compelling to Democrats after the 2016 election, when Mrs. Clinton won the most votes but lost the presidency in the Electoral College. And there is no doubt that Iowa Democrats have set up a strange process with the potential to muddle the outcome.
But ultimately, Iowa is a contest for state delegate equivalents. That is the way Iowa Democrats have set up the game, and that is the way the contestants and participants will be playing it. It does not seem to be the place of a news media organization to decide the winner by another measure.