‘Advocate’ Review: Defending More Than Just Her Clients
The lawyer Lea Tsemel is a contentious figure in Israel. She is known for representing Palestinian defendants, especially in cases in which Israeli sentiment appears starkly stacked against her, such as those that involve violent attacks. Depending on your perspective, Tsemel is either a principled believer in the concept of presumed innocence or an apologist for bloodshed.
To judge from “Advocate,” an engrossing, largely pro-Tsemel profile from Rachel Leah Jones and Philippe Bellaïche, the truth may be a little of each. Tsemel’s choice of clients undoubtedly has ideological underpinnings. She explains how she thinks about her work: “I’m an Israeli occupier, no matter what I do,” Tsemel says. And as an occupier who has not succeeded in changing the government’s policies, she adds, “On what moral grounds should I judge the people who resist my occupation?” Her daughter, Talila Warschawski, is asked if her mother has red lines. “I don’t think so,” she replies.
At the same time, Tsemel has a lawyerly interest in the gray areas of guilt. The highest-profile recent case in “Advocate” involves Tsemel’s defense of Ahmad Manasra, who at age 13 was involved in an October 2015 stabbing attack in East Jerusalem. Tsemel maintained that only Manasra’s cousin, Hassan, who was fatally shot by police during the incident, carried out the stabbings, and that Ahmad did not use the knife he had.
Jones and Bellaïche follow that case as it unfolds, interweaving biographical information about Tsemel  and a rundown of some of her most notable cases. Many trials are not success stories for her. Near the end, Tsemel tells the news media, seemingly humorously, that her title should be “Lea Tsemel, losing lawyer.” Her victories tend to be small: In an opening segment, she explains to a client that the 28-year prison sentence in a plea bargain could have been much worse.
But Tsemel is also seen as a firebrand. She and Tareq Barghout, a Palestinian lawyer who works with her on the Manasra case (and, after filming, became her client), are at times shown at odds. Because of Manasra’s age, the trial was not public, but “Advocate” — which was shot in wide-screen (unusual for a documentary) and shows a refreshing interest in visuals — never plays like it is at a loss for footage. It also makes dynamic use of animation and split screen to obscure certain identities.
Provocative as the film is, it doesn’t fully reconcile Tsemel’s contradictions, if such a thing were even possible or desirable.
On the one hand, Tsemel is fighting for her clients to get fair trials in a legal system that she sees as rigged against them. She looks for precedents in which Israelis received more lenient treatment than her clients in similar circumstances.
On the other hand, if Tsemel’s starting point is that Israelis are occupiers and have no right to judge Palestinian resistance (and Tsemel generally seems to regard the allegations we watch her defend against as that), then what would a fair trial — a form of judgment — even look like?
“Advocate” only begins to broach that question. Avigdor Feldman, a civil rights lawyer who worked with Tsemel on a major case involving interrogation methods, says that Tsemel truly believes that trials can be balanced. Still, an even stronger documentary might have probed whether her idealism and political convictions ever come into conflict. The movie might also have further strayed from friendly ground in its choice of interviewees. But “Advocate” nevertheless makes for potent viewing as a portrait of a steadfast activist with a controversial cause.