6 Dance Performances to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to dance performances happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
AMERICAN DANCE PLATFORM at the Joyce Theater (Jan. 7-8, 7:30 p.m.; Jan. 9, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 12). The fifth iteration of this domestic dance showcase features four programs combining companies as far-flung in style as they often are in geography. The invaluable Brooklyn-based Urban Bush Women is paired with Ohio’s strapping Dayton Contemporary Dance Company (on Tuesday and Jan. 12). The venerable Limón Dance Company, a local treasure, shares performances with Bruce Wood Dance from Dallas (on Wednesday and Jan. 12). Another split bill highlights two San Francisco-based companies: the hip-hop dance-theater troupe Embodiment Project and the nearly half-century-old, virtuosic ODC/Dance (on Jan. 9 and 11). Finally, Philadelphia and Miami come together when the pioneering Rennie Harris Puremovement meets Rosie Herrera Dance Theater (on Jan. 10 and 11).
212-242-0800, joyce.org
THOMAS F. DEFRANTZ AND BROTHER(HOOD) DANCE! at Gibney (Jan. 9-11). Back-to-back programs in the coming week juxtapose artists who, in very different ways, ruminate on black identity — personally and socially, historically and presently. In “Soundz at the Back of My Head,” Defrantz, a choreographer, performer and scholar, concludes his trilogy of lecture-performances that examine, through text and technology, white privilege and the experiences of artists and audiences of color (Jan. 9-10, 6 p.m.; Jan. 11, 8 p.m.). Orlando Zane Hunter Jr. and Ricarrdo Valentine, who constitute Brother(hood) Dance!, present “Afro/Solo/Man,” which they call a “bio-mythography.” It tackles assumptions and misperceptions around the intersection of race, gender and sexuality (Jan. 9-10, 8 p.m.; Jan. 11, 6 p.m.).
646-837-6809, gibneydance.org
FAYE DRISCOLL at New York Live Arts (Jan. 8-10, 8:30 p.m.; through Jan. 11). Driscoll’s “Thank You for Coming” series began in 2014 with “Attendance,” which cleverly reconfigured the performance space and, thus, the dancers’ relationship with the audience. In 2016, she followed that with “Play,” a riotous frolic until it delivers a profoundly moving curveball. The final installment, “Thank You for Coming: Space,” makes its New York debut with Driscoll as the sole performer. As a solo, the work will likely feel more intimate and personal, but the goal of creating a community from those in attendance remains. This may require a degree of viewer engagement, but Driscoll’s invitation is worth accepting.
212-691-6500, newyorklivearts.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
LANZHOU SONG AND DANCE THEATER at the David H. Koch Theater (Jan. 9-11, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 12). The Chinese city of Dunhuang was once a stop on the famous Silk Road. One of its main attractions is the Mogao Caves, which contain ancient Buddhist art. “Tales of the Silk Road,” an elaborate production choreographed in 2000 by Chen Weiya and Zhang Jigang, tells its mythical origin story: The artist Mogao falls in love with Yueya but is forbidden to marry her. They flee, only to get caught in a battle that ends tragically. This troupe, formed in 1973, colorfully illustrates the tale through both traditional and contemporary dance and music.
212-496-0600, davidhkochtheater.com
GABRIELLE REVLOCK at the Flea (Jan. 8-11, 7 p.m.; through Jan. 12). The inspiration for Revlock’s duet “Sex Tape” are conversations and interactions she has had with men. But in translating those experiences to performance, she has replaced the men with a woman so that an erotically charged relationship suddenly becomes a tender, intimate study in friendship. For this program, that work is joined by “Nuptial Blitz,” which dissects the ritual of wedding photographs. Revlock invites several audience members to pose beside her as her betrothed, gently satirizing this ritual while also presenting a spectrum of romantic configurations.
212-226-0051, theflea.org
AKI SASAMOTO at Danspace Project (Jan. 9-11 and 16-18, 8 p.m.). St. Mark’s Church, the home of Danspace, has always been a special place — part theater, part chapel. Sasamoto, a visual and performing artist with a dance background, takes inspiration from the space in “Phase Transition,” an installation and performance. The title of the work comes from the term used to describe when a substance changes from one form to another (e.g., from solid to liquid). Sasamoto will create a custom air circulation system for the church that during her lecture-performances she and others will manipulate, creating a shifting interior climate that speaks to the constantly moving essence of our lives.
866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org