Reckoning With the Wounds Still Left by the Spanish Civil War
LORD OF ALL THE DEAD
A Nonfiction Novel
By Javier Cercas






An individual subjected to traumatic stress will often involuntarily suppress the memory of the event that caused it. Something similar happened to Spain in the 20th century, but the loss of memory wasn’t unwitting; it was enforced.
After the country’s brutal civil war, which lasted from 1936 to 1939, the victor, Generalissimo Francisco Franco, did his best to eradicate all trace of his Republican enemies. Those who died in the conflict or the “White Terror” — the campaign of extermination that followed — were mostly slung into unmarked mass graves, where around 100,000 bodies still lie. The only commemoration Franco allowed was of the heroes and victories of his own side.
The return of democracy after Franco’s death in 1975 took place in the shadow of an army that was loyal to his dictatorship to the end. So the “transition,” as it was called, was underwritten by an unspoken pact in which Franco’s opponents agreed to draw a veil of forgetfulness over his reign. There were to be no reprisals, no recriminations; much less a Truth and Reconciliation Commission of the sort that did so much to heal South Africa’s wounds. It wasn’t until much later that voices were raised in support of a more open reckoning with the war and its aftermath, and not until 2000 that the first of those humiliated corpses were exhumed and given a decent burial.
The following year, Javier Cercas made himself the bard of this movement for the recovery of Spain’s suppressed memory. His semi-fictional work SOLDIERS OF SALAMIS (Vintage, paper, $16.95), which has just been republished, chronicles the search for an anonymous Republican hero: a soldier who saved the life of a leading member of the Falange, the Spanish fascist party that provided Francoism with its earliest ideological underpinnings and then gradually lost influence. Though of exceptional literary merit, it was the kind of work to be expected of a writer who is also a columnist for the center-left daily El País, but who, like so many other Spanish progressives, comes from a middle-class family that took Franco’s side in the civil war.
“Lord of All the Dead,” Cercas’s “nonfiction novel,” first published in Spanish in 2017, presents an altogether more unsettling challenge for politically correct readers — as it must have done for the author himself. Early on, Cercas quotes a remark made by a friend, the filmmaker David Trueba: “In ‘Soldiers of Salamis’ you invented a Republican hero to hide the fact that your family’s hero was a Francoist.”
“And?” Cercas asks.
“Now it’s time to face reality,” Trueba replies. “That’s how you can close the circle.”
“Lord of All the Dead” is the result. The hero of the author’s family was Manuel Mena, a man Cercas’s mother remembered as “the youngest, the most cheerful, the liveliest” of all her uncles.
Mena was a provisional second lieutenant in Franco’s army. It is hard to overstate the importance of the alféreces provisionales in Francoist mythology. They were young men who volunteered to leave their usually comfortable surroundings to go to war after a minimum of training. One in every 10 met his end on the arid battlefields of the Spanish meseta. José María Pemán, the poet laureate of Francoism, had one of them soliloquize as follows: “Here I am, offering you, Spain, / my twenty years, as if they were / twenty fresh dahlias, / and Death / the gardener.”
Mena, wounded five times and lauded by his superiors for his “daring and bravery,” finally ran out of luck in the early hours of Sept. 21, 1938, when he died of an unattended bullet wound in a makeshift hospital near the Ebro River.
Cercas likens his family’s view of Mena’s fate to what the ancient Greeks called a kalos thanatos: a beautiful death, that of “a pure and noble young man who, like Achilles in the ‘Iliad,’ demonstrates his nobility and purity by risking his life for all or nothing … falls in combat and leaves behind the world of the living in the fullness of his beauty and his vigor and escapes the usury of time.”
But what of the man himself? The task of finding the real Manuel Mena could scarcely have been more daunting. His relatives burned his effects, including his papers, after his death. Cercas managed to find a couple of elderly ladies whose memories suggested that as a boy Mena was a “heartless brat.” But then he interviewed some classmates who described how, under the influence of a local schoolteacher, Mena developed a passion for knowledge and turned into an altogether more reflective and responsible adolescent.
Cercas gives himself some postmodern leeway in this narrative, every so often speculating on how, if he were to throw off all pretense of not being a novelist, he would fill in the gaps in his story. But his reconstructions are tied pretty closely to known historical fact, and there’s no question but that he invested a staggering amount of time and effort in digging up what little there was to be known about Manuel Mena. Yet, halfway through the book, his subject remains “a blurry, distant, schematic figure, without humanity or moral complexity, as rigid, cold and abstract as a statue.”
Things start to change when he is given the notes for a speech Mena gave on leave from the front. Cercas’s great-uncle was a fascist, a devotee of the Falange. But, as Cercas shows with a quote from its founder, José Antonio Primo de Rivera, that Mena had written down, the Falange held views not so very distant from those that would ignite the passions of a post-1968 generation of young Spaniards, those valiant successors to Achilles who battled Franco’s riot police with rocks and Molotov cocktails:
“There is a capitalist system with expensive credit, with abusive privileges of shareholders and bondholders, without working, that takes the greater part of production and sinks and impoverishes employers, businessmen and workers alike.”
What finally brings Mena alive to his great-nephew is a family member’s recollection of what the by now battle-hardened alférez provisional told his brother on one of his last furloughs: He was fed up with the war and wished he didn’t have to go back to the front. Suddenly, he “had become a man of flesh and bone, a simple self-respecting muchacho disillusioned of his ideals and a soldier lost in someone else’s war, who didn’t know why he was fighting anymore.”
Manuel Mena was not Achilles. Or, rather, he was not the Achilles of the “Iliad.” As Cercas notes, Achilles also makes a brief yet memorable appearance in the “Odyssey.” When Odysseus visits him in the house of the dead and hails him as the greatest of all heroes, Achilles replies: “I would rather toil as the slave of a penniless, landless laborer than reign here as lord of all the dead.”
The book that takes its title from that infinitely sad affirmation of the value of life is not as readable as “Soldiers of Salamis.” Non-Spaniards will likely want to skip its more detailed accounts of the war. But Cercas keeps his readers curious to the end, and “Lord of All the Dead” is arguably even more important than its predecessor as a contribution to healing the wounds that remain open in Spain to this day.