Rod Stewart and Son Face Battery Charges After New Year’s Eve Altercation
The singer Rod Stewart and his eldest son Sean face battery charges after a New Year’s Eve altercation with a security guard at The Breakers, a resort in Palm Beach, Fla., the police said.
A security guard who was working at an unidentified private event in the children’s area of the hotel saw a group of people just after 11 p.m. on Tuesday trying to gain access to the event who were unauthorized to do so, according to a probable cause affidavit filed by the Palm Beach Police Department.
The guard, identified as Jessie E. Dixon, said that during the encounter, Sean Stewart, 39, got “about nose to nose” from his face, the affidavit said. At that point, Mr. Dixon put the back of his right hand on Sean Stewart’s chest and suggested he needed to back up to make space.
Sean Stewart shoved the guard backward, according to the affidavit.
Rod Stewart, 74, then stepped in and punched the guard in his left rib cage with a closed fist, the affidavit said.
Sean Stewart told the police he became agitated after they were not allowed access. Rod Stewart told the police that he and his family attempted to have the children in their group enter the event and that Mr. Dixon, in denying access to his family, became argumentative.
The authorities spoke with two witnesses who worked at the hotel and also reviewed surveillance footage of the confrontation, which revealed that both the elder and younger Stewarts were “the primary aggressors,” the affidavit said.
Rod Stewart apologized, the affidavit said.
The Stewarts were charged with simple battery, a misdemeanor, and issued notices to appear in Palm Beach court on Feb. 5, court records show. If convicted, they could receive up to one year in jail, one year of probation and up to $1,000 in fines.
A representative for The Breakers declined to comment on Saturday. Requests for comment from managers and press representatives for Rod and Sean Stewart were not immediately returned on Saturday.