In Paris, Champagne and a Butterfly
PARIS — On the first night of the couture shows and the high jewelry presentations scheduled to coincide with them, about 90 jewelry, art and party lovers swept up the broad stone steps of the Musée des Arts Decoratifs.
They came Monday evening to see the latest addition to the museum’s 4,000-piece permanent jewelry collection: a small butterfly brooch by the Taiwanese jeweler Cindy Chao, displayed in a glass vitrine in its Galerie des Bijoux.
Ms. Chao had invited the black-tie crowd, which included François Curiel of Christie’s and the French shoe designer Bruno Frisoni, to sip Deutz Champagne and nibble on caviar and foie gras while viewing her creation.
“We displayed it so can see both faces, the front and the back,” said Dominique Forest, the chief curator. The front of the brooch, which is about 2 inches by 1.5 inches and made of 18-karat gold, displays two Burmese rubies totaling almost 13 carats that are surrounded by more than 1,000 tiny pavé diamonds. The reverse has 82 sapphires totaling almost 2 carats.
The brooch “gives the impression it’s about to take off in flight,” said Ms. Forest, adding that the feeling it evokes was one of the reasons the piece was accepted into the museum’s collection. Another: “the contrast” in size and color “between the rubies and the diamonds,” Ms. Forest said. “It’s all very special.”
Ms. Chao, who calls her business The Art Jewel, described the piece as sculptural. “My grandfather was an architect and my father a sculptor. Art is in my blood,” she told her guests during brief remarks, after being introduced by the museum’s director general, Sylvie Corréard. (Ms. Chao wore a black velvet tuxedo suit and had her hair in a chignon, clearly displaying a pair of her peony earrings that feature 10-carat diamonds and 1,300 small sapphires. A brand executive at the event said the earrings cost $1.56 million.)
In homage to Ms. Chao’s family, two-foot-tall white paper lanterns designed by her grandfather were placed throughout the gallery.
Ghamzeh Alabbar said she had flown in from Dubai for the event, bringing along the diamond earrings and ring from Ms. Chao’s Rose collection that Ms. Alabbar bought last summer when she first discovered the brand at the Masterpiece art fair in London.
“I’m now addicted,” the socialite said. “The pieces are different. People stop and ask about them. It’s not like having a big stone on your finger.”
The French lingerie designer Chantal Thomass had a different appreciation. “As a designer, you put your culture into it, and you can feel the culture of Asia” in Ms. Chao’s work, she said.
And the actress Isabelle Adjani, her pale face half hidden under a fedora, described Ms. Chao’s jewelry as “powerful and poetic.”
“It’s not something you can find in European jewelry,” she said. “It comes from a culture obsessed with nature, with flowers and butterflies. It’s a different interpretation of nature that’s opulent and generous.” (Julia Roberts may have had a similar thought when she wore diamond and conch pearl earrings by Ms. Chao to present the best picture award at the 2019 Oscars.)
The celebration continued in the museum’s gold and white Salon des Boiseries over a dinner of lobster salad; chartreuse de pintade, or guinea fowl wrapped in green cabbage; and the puff pastry and whipped cream dessert confection St.-Honoré, named for the French patron saint of bakers and pastry chefs. The meal was served at three long tables topped with voluptuous displays of ranunculus, anemones and roses of deep saturated red, like the rubies in the butterfly’s wings.
The museum’s newest piece was the first butterfly brooch Ms. Chao made, in 2008; she now makes a new one every year. “Two thousand eight was a difficult year for me,” she said, explaining that she had spent four years in business and, at that point, did not know if she would continue.
“I thought this might be the last piece I ever made,” she said, so she chose a butterfly. “It’s ephemeral. It doesn’t live very long, but it lives beautifully.”
In much the same way, as the evening drew to a close, guests donned their coats and air-kissed their goodbyes, piled into the town cars and taxis lined up on the Rue de Rivoli and headed off into the Paris night.