Did the Saudis Play a Role in 9/11? Here’s What We Found
F.B.I. agents who secretly investigated Saudi connections to the 9/11 attacks for more than a decade after high-level officials discounted government links found circumstantial evidence of such support but could not find a smoking gun, a joint investigation by The New York Times Magazine and ProPublica shows.
One dogged F.B.I. agent in San Diego helped drive the investigation for years, after superiors advised the team to give up on the case. Three presidential administrations have built a wall of secrecy around information about possible Saudi government ties to the attacks.
“Given the lapse of time, I don’t know any reason why the truth should be kept from the American people,” said Richard Lambert, who led the F.B.I.’s initial 9/11 investigation in San Diego.
The full article includes new details that have never been reported before, revealing missed investigative opportunities. Read the entire article from The New York Times Magazine here.
But if you have limited time, here are the main takeaways.
An investigator found evidence that suggested Omar al-Bayoumi, a mysteriously well-connected Saudi student who knew two of the hijackers, Khalid al-Mihdhar and Nawaf al-Hazmi, might have had prior knowledge of the plot, even though senior U.S. officials had essentially exonerated him.
A former supervisor of the investigation said he thought the finding would have been more significant if it had been discovered in the fall of 2001.
“That would have been harder evidence,” the supervisor, Joseph Foelsch, said. “If not a smoking gun, a warm gun.”
Telephone records that were reanalyzed years later revealed multiple calls among Mr. Bayoumi; Fahad al-Thumairy, a Saudi diplomat and imam; and Anwar al-Awlaki, a Yemeni-American imam who was killed in a drone attack in 2011.
In 2010, the F.B.I. planned to place two Saudi religious officials from the kingdom’s Ministry of Islamic Affairs under full-time surveillance. The bureau had previously found that their travel overlapped with movements by the hijackers and people believed to be supporting them, and that they had ties to suspected militants. The two men sought new visas to study English in the United States, which officials feared could be cover for something nefarious.
But, F.B.I. agents believe, the C.I.A. intervened before the surveillance could happen.
To gain the trust of a reluctant source, investigators lied and told a Yemeni man he had a previously unknown child. The investigator employed a graphics editor to fabricate an image of a 5-year-old using images of the man and his wife.
“I knew I had a kid!” the man, Mohdar Abdullah, said excitedly.
The man later provided intelligence that led investigators to two more people who knew two of the hijackers when they were in California, helping to piece together where they spent their first two weeks in the United States.
Federal prosecutors in New York issued grand jury subpoenas for two witnesses as recently as 2015, but the subpoenas were withdrawn.  A senior prosecutor said there was not enough hard evidence for a successful prosecution.
In 2016, the investigative team was broken up, with the case assigned to another team. The Justice Department insists it remains open, but officials said there had been little activity since 2016.