What to Know About Taiwan’s Presidential Election
HONG KONG — Voters in Taiwan are widely expected to deliver a victory on Saturday to President Tsai Ing-wen, in defiance of China’s pressure campaign against the island democracy.
If she wins a second term, as polls indicate she will, Ms. Tsai will have made a dramatic comeback from 2018, when her party was battered in local elections. In the 14 months since, she has rallied her party’s leadership behind her and rebuilt public support by overseeing economic growth, despite Beijing’s efforts to isolate her government.
Ms. Tsai’s rise has been driven in part by concerns about Chinese encroachment. Xi Jinping, China’s leader, has lured away some of the few countries that formally recognize Taiwan, as well as stepping up military air patrols and sending carriers through the Taiwan Strait.
But according to surveys, voters believe Ms. Tsai is better able to defend Taiwan’s sovereignty than her challengers. The issue took on increased importance last year as Hong Kong saw huge protests against China’s increasing sway over that city.
Ms. Tsai’s main opponent, Han Kuo-yu of the opposition Kuomintang party, is a former lawmaker who surged to prominence in 2018, when he was elected mayor of Kaohsiung, a longtime stronghold of Ms. Tsai’s Democratic Progressive Party.
But Mr. Han’s star has dimmed in recent months, amid disunity in his party and increased scrutiny of his more accommodating views of the Chinese government.
Here’s a look at the race, the stakes involved, the issues dominating the campaign and the likely outcomes:
In many ways, victory for Ms. Tsai would serve as a rebuke of Beijing’s decades-long strategy to win control of Taiwan.
Taiwan has had de facto independence since 1949, but China’s ruling Communist Party claims it as Chinese territory and has pushed for unification. Ms. Tsai has been more resistant to China’s efforts to increase its influence over Taiwan than the Kuomintang opposition has been.
Beijing has tried to punish her by ending contact with her government, by poaching from Taiwan’s handful of formal diplomatic allies and by reducing the number of Chinese tourists who cross the Taiwan Strait.
The Chinese leader, Mr. Xi, who has overseen a turn toward greater authoritarianism, last year drew a harder line on Taiwan, saying that unification with the island was an inevitable goal. He threatened military force should it seek formal independence.
Mr. Xi said Taiwan’s freedoms would be guaranteed under a version of the “one country, two systems” political framework that Beijing has used in Hong Kong since Britain handed back the former colony in 1997.
But that is an unpopular proposal in Taiwan, where polls show that the population would rather maintain the status quo.
Ms. Tsai quickly dismissed Mr. Xi’s call for unification last January, in a speech that gained her broad support in Taiwan. The antigovernment protests in Hong Kong since June, which have brought to light deep public anger there over the erosion of civil liberties under Chinese rule, have also helped to boost Ms. Tsai’s popularity.
Ms. Tsai’s campaign recently released a video highlighting the resentment of Beijing that has spilled into the open in Hong Kong. It promoted her party as a defender against the threat to life in Taiwan posed by China’s authoritarian rule: “We choose to stand with democracy,” the narrator said.
Her administration has also highlighted concerns about Chinese efforts to influence the election, pointing to the spreading of disinformation during the campaign that appears aimed at undermining Ms. Tsai’s party.
Adding to concerns about Chinese infiltration was the account of a man who told the authorities in Australia that he had worked as a Chinese intelligence operative in Taiwan to help curry support for Mr. Han. Mr. Han denied the assertions, which remain unverified, but the case drew more attention to his views on China.
Mr. Han, Ms. Tsai’s main rival, was once seen as a formidable opponent, but his prospects have dimmed.
He has cultivated an image as a political maverick unafraid to challenge Taiwan’s political elites, which initially brought him immense support. He pushed for warmer ties with China, arguing that the economy would benefit, and he traveled to the mainland for meetings with Chinese officials.
That stance has won him tacit support from China. But it increasingly became a liability during the second half of 2019, as the protests in Hong Kong ensured that concerns about Beijing’s reach stayed front-and-center.
Mr. Han’s campaign has also been weakened by divides between his supporters and some of the traditional elite in his party, the Kuomintang, or K.M.T. In contrast, Ms. Tsai was able to unify her party, the D.P.P., behind her. She named her chief primary rival as her running mate.
“Even before the Hong Kong situation erupted, the D.P.P. had regained momentum, and by early June they were making themselves ready for the general election,” said Titus C. Chen, an associate professor of political science at National Sun Yat-sen University in Kaohsiung. “They united among themselves at a moment when the K.M.T. fell apart.”
Mr. Han, who had previously led an government-owned company that handles farm product distribution in Taipei, Taiwan’s capital, won the Kaohsiung mayoral race amid a surge in popularity that his supporters called the “Han wave.” His party won in several key cities in 2018, and the election was a broad rout for the Democratic Progressive Party. Ms. Tsai resigned as party leader to take responsibility for the losses.
But the past eight months have seen a long, steady slide in Mr. Han’s popularity. He is facing a recall drive from Kaohsiung residents who criticized him for running for president so soon after becoming mayor. He has spent much of the race battling accusations ranging from sleeping late to failing to energetically fight a dengue fever outbreak in Kaohsiung.
“He had a pretty miserable campaign,” said Nathan Batto, an associate research fellow at Academia Sinica, a state-funded research institution in Taipei.
The final election polls showed him trailing Ms. Tsai by double-digit margins.
Mr. Han’s electoral success in Kaohsiung had much to do with his campaign’s emphasis on economic issues, like stagnant wages. He tried to return to such themes during the presidential campaign. But in his short time running the city, he has done little to show that he was the candidate who could bring about growth.
Taiwan’s economy performed strongly last year, with final figures expected to show that growth exceeded that of regional competitors like South Korea and Hong Kong. Despite China’s efforts to undermine tourism in Taiwan, the island has seen its arrivals grow, thanks to more visitors from Japan and Southeast Asia.
And economists say Taiwan has benefited from the trade war between the United States and China, as it absorbs some manufacturing and investment from companies that want to avoid any new tariffs imposed by the Trump administration.
“It may have much less to do with D.P.P. economic policy, but people here attribute that performance to D.P.P. government preparations,” Professor Chen said.