More People Are Dying on New York City’s Streets. What Went Wrong?
As New York City tackled the stubborn problem of street safety in recent years, it earned praise for pushing down traffic deaths to their lowest level in a century and helped begin a national movement to make roads safer for pedestrians and cyclists.
But years of progress could be in jeopardy: The number of traffic deaths rose in 2019, fueled by a spike in cyclist fatalities that has devastated and angered the city’s vibrant biking community.
The troubling statistics have raised doubts about Mayor Bill de Blasio’s signature plan to improve street safety and prompted the City Council to embrace an ambitious effort to add 250 miles of protected bike lanes to “break the car culture.”
While numbers can fluctuate from year to year, the figures highlight how difficult it is to reduce deaths in a crowded city with a dangerous mix of impatient drivers, droves of pedestrians and cyclists who are often vulnerable to traffic. While some New Yorkers want to ban cars from Manhattan, city officials say they must also balance the needs of those who use vehicles for commuting and commerce.
Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat in his second term, made street safety a top priority during his first year in office and pledged to eliminate all traffic deaths by 2024. His plan, known as Vision Zero, was modeled after a Swedish approach that views all deaths as preventable. Other American cities, such as Los Angeles and Boston, have followed suit.
Promisingly, the number of traffic deaths in New York City had dropped in recent years. Then suddenly, they rose in the past year to 219, from 203 deaths in 2018, according to preliminary data from the city. There were 28 cyclist deaths in 2019, the highest level in two decades and more than double the number in the previous year.
“We’re grieving a lot about what’s happened this year,” Polly Trottenberg, the city’s transportation commissioner, said in an interview. She added that the year was still the second safest on record. “I don’t want people to lose heart,” she said.
The cyclist deaths have led to outrage and grief over those who lost their lives. The victims included a 10-year-old boy killed by an unlicensed driver steps from his home and a 52-year-old man who was hit seemingly out of nowhere by a careening car, in a collision that was captured in a startling video.
Ms. Trottenberg pointed to several reasons behind the increase in deaths, including more collisions involving large vehicles such as trucks and S.U.V.s, and reckless behavior by drivers.
Cyclists have called on the police to more aggressively enforce traffic laws and city officials to install more protected bike lanes that are physically separated from traffic. Biking has become increasingly popular in New York City — the number of daily bike trips has nearly doubled, to 490,000 trips in 2017 from 250,000 in 2010.
Cyclists regularly post photos online of treacherous routes and police cars and other vehicles blocking bike lanes.
“It’s been a particularly difficult year, especially for New Yorkers who bike,” said Joe Cutrufo, a spokesman for Transportation Alternatives, a group that promotes cycling. “Most of the people killed while biking in 2019 would still be alive if there had been a protected — and unobstructed — bike lane available.”
One of the most recent victims was Daniel Cammerman, a pediatrician on the Upper East Side of Manhattan who was hit by a school bus while he biked near Central Park. Tributes from families have poured into his practice’s Facebook page.
“He’s been more than a doctor. He’s been her advocate,” said Johanny Cruz, the mother of a daughter with special needs. “It’s like we lost a family member.”
For years, traffic deaths had declined, from nearly 300 deaths in 2013, the year before Vision Zero began. Under Mr. de Blasio, the city lowered the speed limit on most streets to 25 miles per hour and added 100 miles of protected bike lanes.
But pedestrian deaths, which account for the largest share of traffic fatalities, have been a difficult problem in a city where many people walk everywhere. The deaths increased to 122 in 2019 from 115 in 2018. The fatalities included a pedestrian who was hit by a truck on New Year’s Eve in Harlem. A 23-year-old man was charged with driving while intoxicated in the death.
The number of people who died in vehicles rose to 44 in 2019, from 38 in 2018. In one bright spot, the number of motorcyclist deaths fell to 25, from 40 in 2018.
The streets of New York City have long been known for being dangerous. The number of traffic fatalities peaked in 1929 at 1,360 deaths, even though there were far fewer cars than there are today. As recently as 1990, there were more than 700 traffic deaths.
In November, Mr. de Blasio signed a law that requires the city to build 250 miles of protected bike lanes in the coming years, along with a dizzying list of other street upgrades. The city must hit specific targets, including building 150 miles of bus lanes that are physically separated from other traffic lanes or monitored by cameras.
The law was crafted by Corey Johnson, the speaker of the City Council who is expected to run for mayor next year. He persuaded the mayor to support the law after Mr. de Blasio’s administration had expressed concerns over its aggressive timeline.
Even as Mr. de Blasio has faced withering criticism from safety groups over traffic deaths, he also won accolades for a new “busway” on 14th Street in Manhattan. The city closed the route to most traffic to prioritize buses.
Some drivers increasingly feel under siege. Mr. Johnson has pledged to “break the car culture” and says there are too many parking spots in the city. A local transportation committee in Manhattan wants to eliminate free street parking altogether.
And beginning in 2021, New York will be the first American city to charge drivers entering the busiest commercial district. Under the plan, known as congestion pricing, drivers might have to pay as much as $14 to enter Manhattan below 60th Street.
Ms. Trottenberg, the transportation commissioner, said growing truck traffic was one reason deaths were up.
“I think that is part of the larger trend in the city — more packages, more commerce,” she said. “We’re seeing an increased volume of truck traffic on the streets. When a truck and a pedestrian or a cyclist have a collision, the results can be very deadly.”
With lower gas prices around $2.50, more New Yorkers are driving larger vehicles like S.U.V.s and trucks, which can cause more damage, Ms. Trottenberg said. But many of the crashes come down to reckless driving.
“We have also seen this year a lot of bad driver behavior on the streets — there have been a lot of cases of speeding, failure to yield and unlicensed driving,” she said.
The city will move quickly in the new year to install more bike lanes and cameras to catch drivers who are speeding, Ms. Trottenberg said.
“Despite the challenging year we’ve had, we’re doing a lot of important things,” she said. “We’ve set incredibly aggressive targets for building protected bike lanes, with a lot of mileage in Brooklyn.”