A Sprawling Space for Cocktails and Bar Fare in Midtown Manhattan
This lobby lounge, in the Company Building, which is home to a collection of tech start-ups, sprawls over 8,500 square feet, with cushy booths and tables, a 63-foot bar, and an arched, tiled ceiling to echo the Guastavino installation across the street in Grand Central Terminal. It’s the work of Company You Keep Hospitality, a division of Company, the firm that owns the building. The restaurant’s food consists mostly of bar fare, like charcuterie plates, pizza bianca with various toppings, and dips like a take on cacio e pepe with flatbread. Tien Ho, who was formerly with Momofuku, Whole Foods and, briefly, Wild Ink in Hudson Yards, is the chef. Graceanne Jordan, who worked with Danny Meyer, among others, is managing the restaurant, and Anthony Merlino, formerly at the Modern, is in charge of the bar.
A tasting, or omakase, of yakitori, grilled skewered chicken many ways, will be the specialty at this offshoot of Torishiki, a highly esteemed Tokyo yakitori destination. The New York restaurant, with 16 seats at the counter, is the work of Yoshiteru Ikegawa, the yakitori expert behind the Tokyo original. He has teamed up with a larger, more international company, Showa Hospitality. In New York, the $150 tasting will start with vegetable skewers, move on to chicken parts grilled over binchotan charcoal, and end with chicken soup. (Opens Thursday)
This is the fourth in Jacob Hadjigeorgis’s collection of places within a block of one another on the Upper West Side. He started with Jacob’s Pickles, adding Maison Pickle, then Lucky Pickle and now this tiki bar. True to its name, the restaurant is splashed with hula décor, neon, and frozen drinks galore dispensed from machines and sporting paper umbrellas. Other drink categories are classics, originals and adventures that are meant for sharing. The food comes down to fried chicken sandwiches, three made with Spam, all by the chef Glenroy Brown.
Of course the new bar and restaurant on the second floor of Bergdorf Goodman’s Men’s Store is smartly tailored with an Art Deco look to reflect the style of the building. Dustin Wilson, a master sommelier who worked at Eleven Madison Park, has consulted on the drinks, featuring the classics with some refined touches. Overseeing the kitchen is Austin Johnson, also of Eleven Madison Park and more recently at Frenchie in Paris. The restaurant serves breakfast, brunch, lunch and an all-day menu of oysters, mushroom soup, beef tartare, a club sandwich, king crab roll and tagliatelle with black truffles. Store hours are observed, with the restaurant open from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. on Sundays.
Anassa Taverna on the Upper East Side of Manhattan has spun off a branch in Astoria where there’s no shortage of Greek restaurants. This one is spacious and contemporary, done in pale, neutral tones, with bare brick and a display of seafood. The menu is a typical affair with spreads, zucchini fritters, piles of paper-thin fried zucchini and eggplant, simply grilled fish, and some specialties like moussaka, swordfish kebabs and lamb chops.
Another Urbanspace food hall in Midtown Manhattan features an assortment of vendors, and this one includes some food hall first timers. Among them are Eisenberg’s, the venerable sandwich shop in the Flatiron district, Lolo’s Seafood Shack from Harlem, and TomoTomo with ramen and Japanese small plates. There will be two bars, one on the mezzanine and one on the ground floor. (Opens Wednesday)
After 15 years, this acclaimed Long Island restaurant and hotel has changed hands. The chef John Fraser is taking over the property through his company JF Restaurants, with other investors. It is now closed, with a reopening expected in the spring. The restaurant was originally opened in 2005 by the chef Gerry Hayden, his wife, the pastry chef Claudia Fleming, and Mike and Mary Mraz in a historic building and former restaurant, and has been run in recent years by Ms. Fleming after Mr. Hayden’s death. Ms. Fleming said they had been seeking the right person to take over for more than five years. “I can’t think of a better steward,” she said of Mr. Fraser. As a young chef, Mr. Fraser worked on the East End of Long Island, so he’s familiar with the territory. (Mr. Fraser, an owner of The Loyal in Manhattan, also runs the restaurants in the Times Square Edition Hotel, is a partner in the restaurant Nix, and also just opened Ardor in the West Hollywood Edition in California.) He plans to have Brian Wilson stay on as chef. Ms. Fleming will stay as well, as pastry chef. The restaurant’s popular food truck will also return in the spring.
Mr. Koenig, the former chef de cuisine at Tom Colicchio’s Craft, was named the executive chef at the Preston House & Hotel, a year-round establishment in Riverhead, N.Y.
It’s been a little more than a year, but Adam Leonti has closed his elegant Upper West Side restaurant. He has not responded to requests for comment.
Georgette Farkas has closed her six-year-old Upper East Side restaurant. She did not provide specifics but hinted that business had been difficult.
Follow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram, Facebook, YouTube and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.