Tom Railsback, Who Reconciled G.O.P. to Oust Nixon, Dies at 87
Tom Railsback, an eight-term Illinois congressman who forged what he called a “fragile bipartisan coalition” between his fellow Republicans and the Democratic majority on the House Judiciary Committee in 1974 to draft articles of impeachment against President Richard M. Nixon, died on Monday in Mesa, Ariz. He was 87.
His death, in a nursing home there, was confirmed by former Representative Raymond H. LaHood, another moderate Republican, who was Mr. Railsback’s protégé and served as secretary of transportation in the Obama administration.
On July 27, 1974, the judiciary committee voted 27 to 11, with 6 of the panel’s 17 Republicans joining all 21 Democrats, to send to the full House an article of impeachment. The article accused the president of unlawful tactics that constituted a “course of conduct or plan” to obstruct the investigation of the break-in at the offices of the Democratic opposition in the Watergate complex in Washington by a White House team of burglars.
“Railsback and Walter Flowers, a Democrat, basically created the coalition that was necessary to make the House Judiciary Committee vote a bipartisan one,” Michael Koncewicz, the author of “They Said No to Nixon: Republicans Who Stood Up to the President’s Abuses of Power” (2018), wrote in an email.
“Several moderates and conservatives met in Railsback’s office that summer to make sure that there was an article of impeachment that they could vote for,” Mr. Koncewicz, a historian at New York University, said. “Their work not only gave the vote credibility, but it also arguably made Nixon’s conviction more likely in the Senate.”
Rather than face impeachment and a trial in the Senate, Nixon resigned in August 1974.
Mr. Railsback had been conflicted for months. He was loyal to Nixon, a friend whose support had helped him get elected to the House for the first time in 1966.
“In my opinion Richard Nixon has done many wonderful things for his country,” Mr. Railsback said on the House floor, close to tears. “I wish the president could do something to absolve himself.”
But Mr. Railsback said he was also committed to the Constitution, which, he explained later, the president appeared to have violated by withholding evidence from Congress and, even more, by implicating himself in a cover-up in conversations recorded on White House tapes, which the courts had ordered the administration to release.
“If the Congress doesn’t get the material we think we need and then votes to exonerate,” he said, “we’ll be regarded as a paper tiger.”
Mr. Railsback also helped draft a second article of impeachment, charging the president with abusing his authority. But he balked when Democrats proposed further articles citing allegations concerning Mr. Nixon’s tax returns and his covert bombing of Cambodia during the Vietnam War.
Add those, he warned, “and you watch what’s going to happen to your fragile bipartisan coalition.”
After voting for the two impeachment articles in the committee, Mr. Railsback said, “I don’t feel very good about it.”
His pivotal votes provoked vitriolic reactions from some constituents. (“Tom Railsback, as of this moment, is a dead duck,” The Journal Star of Peoria proclaimed.) But he received a standing ovation from a local chamber of commerce, and he was re-elected to four more terms.
His name, along with those of a few other Republicans who voted with him, was invoked by Democrats in the fall as a profile in courage during the House debate over impeaching President Trump. No Republican members voted for impeachment.
“Where’s our Bill Cohen? Where’s our Hamilton Fish? Where’s our Tom Railsback?” Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat, asked in an interview.
But in an Op-Ed article in The New York Times in 2012, Mr. Railsback had said bipartisanship began to evaporate shortly after Watergate.
“When I was elected as a Republican to Congress in 1966 and assigned to the House Judiciary Committee, I was impressed at how nonpartisan it was,” he wrote.
A turning point, he recalled, was the Democratic landslide in the midterm elections of 1974.
“The influx of a group of young, brash anti-Nixon Democrats created an atmosphere of division and unease,” he wrote. “The climate today in Congress appears even more fractured.”
Thomas Fisher Railsback was born on Jan. 22, 1932, in Moline, Ill., to Fred and Elizabeth (Johnson) Railsback. His father was a municipal lawyer.
Tom Railsback received a bachelor’s degree from Grinnell College in Iowa in 1954, graduated from Northwestern University School of Law in 1957 and served in the Army from 1957 to 1959.
His marriage to Patricia Sloan in 1955 ended in divorce. Survivors include his second wife, Joyelyn (Silver) Railsback; four daughters from his first marriage, Kathy, Maggie and Lisa Railsback and Julie Hilden; two stepdaughters, Jennifer Stucki and JaNeil Jorgensen; two stepsons, Brian Mihlfeith and Derek Mihlfeith; and 19 grandchildren.
Mr. Railsback served in the Illinois House of Representatives from 1962 to 1966, when he was elected to Congress, defeating Gale Schisler, a freshman Democrat. In Washington, he was instrumental in drawing up juvenile justice legislation.
After his Western Illinois district was remapped, he lost a Republican primary in 1982 to a more conservative rival, State Senator Kenneth G. McMillan, who himself was defeated that November by the Democratic nominee, Lane Evans.
After leaving Congress, Mr. Railsback became a lobbyist, including as executive vice president of the Motion Picture Association of America and Washington coordinator for the Federal Judges Association.