Review: The Philharmonic and a Conductor Get Reacquainted
At the New York Philharmonic, this is a season of getting reacquainted with maestros. Philippe Jordan returned in October for the first time since 2007; Harry Bicket, in December, for the first time since 2006. Gustavo Dudamel faces the orchestra next week after being away for 11 years. In February, Franz Welser-Möst comes back after 20; in March, Valery Gergiev, after 10; in May, John Adams, after 16.
The time since Daniel Harding, who led the Philharmonic in works by Grieg and Strauss at David Geffen Hall on Thursday, last appeared here — just over eight years — has been shorter than for these other men. But his absence may have been the most freighted.
When he conducted the orchestra on three occasions in 2011, it was at the tail end of an extended campaign to ingratiate this British artist with American ensembles. The effort never took: By his own account, he talked too much in rehearsals early in his career, thoroughly alienating musicians in this country with what they perceived as an upstart’s arrogance.
Now 44, Mr. Harding has been successful in Europe, so there hasn’t been a pressing need to return to the United States and its sites of mutual frustration and uneven results. But he has begun to reintroduce himself gingerly, with dates in San Francisco in 2018.
And now New York. There was certainly intention, and intelligence, behind the account of Grieg’s classic Piano Concerto on Thursday. From the first phrase in the orchestra, each note articulated with almost neurotic clarity, there was the sense hovering over the performance of big-I Interpretation.
This sometimes felt like keen insight, as when Mr. Harding created almost-duets between the solo piano and woodwind voices that can often fade deep into the background. And it sometimes felt less persuasive, as when he stretched many phrases out almost to a halt.
He did have an eager, eloquent partner for that approach in the pianist Paul Lewis, with whom Mr. Harding and his Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra collaborated in 2016 on an elegantly passionate version of Brahms’s First Concerto. Mr. Lewis, bringing refinement and delicacy to a Grieg concerto that in some hands can sound brawny, dotted his first-movement cadenza with what felt like vast expanses of emptiness, as if pulling the work a few decades forward, toward Ravel.
There was awkwardness in the concerto’s horn solos, as there was (with a different player in the principal chair) in Strauss’s “Alpine Symphony,” after intermission. Mr. Harding guided this long, episodic piece with sure pacing and a sense of even flow amid all the quick transitions, but the Philharmonic’s sound lacked lucidity, let alone distinguishing beauty.
Even the very first note was not quite together, and there was a sense throughout of a slightly blurred, unsettled quality, as if the work hadn’t gotten quite enough rehearsal. There was an unpleasant edge to the violins as Strauss’s “Sunset” passage arrived; murkiness from the brasses; and an overall need of focus. (Though there were also sweet solos from the oboist Katherine Needleman, a guest from the Baltimore Symphony.)
It was hard to forget that there had been, over the past month, more sumptuous and also more transparent Strauss playing from the orchestra across Lincoln Center’s plaza, in “Der Rosenkavalier” at the Metropolitan Opera, conducted — by coincidence — by Mr. Harding’s mentor, Simon Rattle.
It should be said, in closing, that the Philharmonic’s program was preposterous: The orchestra last played one of these works (the Grieg) just 10 months ago, and the other just nine months before that. It’s hard to know who is served — the musicians? the audiences? — by such overeager reprises of standard repertory. As with conductors, so with pieces: A little absence can make the heart grow fonder.