Corrections: Jan. 31, 2020
An article on Thursday about a dispute between protesters in India and the Modi government over the legacy of Mohandas K. Gandhi misidentified the Bharatiya Janata Party lawmaker who edited a pamphlet about the citizenship law. He is Prabhat Jha, not Shiv Shakti Bakshi.
An article on Thursday about newly released images of the sun’s surface captured by the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope in Hawaii misstated the temperature of the sun’s surface. It is about 5,000 degrees Celsius, not Fahrenheit.
An article on Wednesday about the testimony of James E. Mitchell, a former C.I.A. contract psychologist, misidentified two sons of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed. His lawyers said they are Hamza, who was 9 when seized by Pakistani security forces in 2002, and Zaid, 7 at the time. The boys had previously been identified by human rights organizations as Yusuf and Abed.
An article on Thursday about an event in a black community in Cleveland that promoted Trump administration policies and gave cash prizes to attendees misidentified the news outlet that first reported about the event. It was Cleveland.com, not Politico.
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about how the Republican Party attracted white blue-collar voters misstated part of a remark by Dean Lacy, a political scientist at Dartmouth College. He said many blue-collar voters felt they had been left without an economic champion; he did not say white college-educated voters felt that way. The article also misstated the recent wage level in Montgomery County, Ohio. The average wage was around $24 an hour in the second quarter of last year, not $24 a week.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.