The Perils of Renovating if You Rent
Aaron Bloom is not your typical renter.
Since renting a duplex in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, in 2012, he has worn the hats of architect, carpenter, general contractor and even landlord, when he decided to sublet the lower floor. He gut renovated the space and made it his own. But when his lease came up for renewal last year, he was reminded that he was, ultimately, just a renter.
When Mr. Bloom found the apartment on Craigslist, the five-bedroom didn’t have much to recommend it. A corner unit in a three-story brick building, it “was worse than a tenement,” he said, with dropped ceilings that were collapsing from years of water leaks, severely sloping floors and ancient windows that let in drafts. The rent, at $3,500 a month, was about market rate.
But Mr. Bloom, a woodworker and former professional clown, saw an unusual opportunity for a renter: the ability to completely remake a space. He had just moved back to New York from the West Coast, where he had almost opened a shared shop space, he said, and “I was itching to get a hands-on project going.”
A friend who was a semiretired contractor told him that the renovation would take about three months and could serve as a calling card for the carpentry and contracting business they were planning to start together. Mr. Bloom negotiated a six-and-a-half-year lease with the landlord, with 2 percent annual increases. In exchange, he agreed to foot the bill for a major overhaul, turning the duplex into two apartments, paying for all utilities and shouldering other responsibilities, including replacing and maintaining the building’s mechanicals.
It crossed Mr. Bloom’s mind that it might be risky to gut renovate a building he didn’t own, but his friend assured him that over the length of the lease they could easily recoup their renovation expenses with the rental income from the fixed-up apartments.
Five months of 14-hour days and more than $10,000 later, the friend was long gone and Mr. Bloom was living in an open construction site without a kitchen and showering at the YMCA down the street. But he had managed to rent the now thoughtfully renovated downstairs unit — a two-bedroom — for $2,750 a month. Over the next five years, Mr. Bloom poured more money into the building and slowly renovated the top floor into a home for himself.
“It turned into a kind of art project up here,” said Mr. Bloom, 50, who gutted both 800-square-foot units, installed new windows and appliances, insulated the floors and walls, and ripped out the water-damaged dropped ceilings. To level the floors, he built a precisely calibrated platform over the existing floors, then laid new hardwood and tile on top.
In his unit, he installed terrazzo kitchen countertops, hidden cabinets, built-in bookshelves, window seats, tiger-wood floors, a sleeping nook and a European-style wet bathroom. A standard square door frame between the kitchen and living room became a keyhole arched doorway with a corresponding miniature keyhole doorway for his cats, Mozart and Gita.
“When I started, this building was a dead thing. I had to do total demo work. I literally carried thousands of pounds up these stairs,” said Mr. Bloom, who acquired so much experience during the process that he started a design-build company.
“I’m really proud that I’ve made it into this,” he said. “Rather than going to therapy, I rebuilt myself by rebuilding a broken building.”
Occupation: Designer and builder
A slow renovation: After prioritizing the downstairs renovation so he could rent out that space, he took his time on his unit upstairs. “I didn’t always have the time or money for the projects I wanted to do,” said Mr. Bloom, who spent months deliberating over the placement of interior windows in the second bathroom, eventually finding optimal positions for light and modesty.
If he could have a do-over, he might not do it again: “By the time my friend disappeared, I had already spent $5,000 or $6,000. It’s funny, but at the time I felt like there were no options. I was like, ‘I started, so I have to finish.’”
The project, however, ate through his savings. Despite doing all the work himself and using as much salvaged material as he could — mostly leftover lots bought at auction — Mr. Bloom said he spent more than $60,000 on materials and increased the property value of the 1,600-square-foot space by what he conservatively estimated to be about $350,000.
“All of this was done on my own dime; the landlord didn’t pay for a nail,” Mr. Bloom said. “My rent was subsidized, but that was offset by spending $60,000.”
He hoped to renew his lease at favorable rates. But last spring, the landlord told him the rent would go from $3,865 a month to $5,850. And Mr. Bloom would still be responsible for heat and building maintenance — from replacing a broken refrigerator in one of the two apartments to dealing with a broken boiler.
“I was astonished I did not get a better deal,” said Mr. Bloom, who couldn’t afford the increase. Finally, in late fall, after months of negotiation, he signed a new four-year-lease at $4,800 a month, with 2 percent annual increases. While he would have preferred to simply rent his own unit at a discount, the landlord was not amenable to splitting the leases, and Mr. Bloom is still responsible for the heat and maintenance, including replacing appliances, although not for the mechanicals or the roof.
The deal, he said, is barely financially manageable. The downstairs unit now rents for $3,150 a month, leaving him with a cost of $1,650 for the top floor. And the landlord has told him he must leave after his current lease ends in 2023.
“The space I created is a delightful, strange, kooky space,” he said. “I think I wanted to create a space that felt welcoming and like my New York — the way New York used to be.”
But it ended up driving home the reality of renting in New York: If you’re not in a rent-stabilized apartment, your claim on a place begins and ends with the lease.
“It’s challenging to reconcile the idea of home with impermanence,” he said. “But that is the nature of being a renter.”