I Can’t Afford These First Editions, but I Buy Them Anyway
Beneath tight brown paper, inside a bubble-wrapped box, nestled in plastic foam inside another sealed box, inside a package inside a FedEx envelope, the squat book sat — its plain red cover glowing like a battered ember: the first, unauthorized edition of “Religio Medici” by the 17th-century physician and writer’s writer Thomas Browne. It’s mine. I own it.
I own every Thomas Browne first edition now. I bought them more or less in the order in which I enjoy them, following Browne down the elaborately filigreed labyrinths of his strange obsessions, on subjects as diverse as whether elephants have knees and what species of fish Jesus ate after the Resurrection. First “Pseudodoxia Epidemica,” from 1646, Browne’s extended debunking of “vulgar errors,” then his “Miscellany Tracts,” which contains his glorious essay “Musaeum Clausum,” perhaps the first English history of lost books. Virginia Woolf described his masterpiece, “Hydriotaphia,” a survey of funerary customs, as “a cathedral where the organ goes plunging and soaring and indulging in vast and elephantine gambols of awful yet grotesque sublimity.” Probably the most beautiful book, physically, is his “Posthumous Writings” from 1712, with its foldout plates of the Norfolk cathedral. But the unauthorized “Religio Medici” — on the faith of a doctor — was the most expensive of my purchases (about the cost of a month’s rent on a one-bedroom in Park Slope), and also the grimiest. It is the equivalent of a 400-year-old bootleg DVD.
The affliction of the vast majority of writers is to know what everyone in the world should buy and never to have any money. To be a writer is to be able to stride into a billionaire’s home and critique the gauche fussiness of an ormolu clock over the mantelpiece when you couldn’t afford the cut flowers in the powder room. But every writer I know owns at least one object he or she cannot afford but has to have — a vintage YSL jacket, a Linn LP12 turntable, a collection of prisoner-made demon sculptures. For me, it’s Thomas Browne. These books are not conspicuous consumption. I don’t show them to anybody. They sit in a safe place in my office, where I rarely go. I need them for myself, not others.
The bookish are a diasporic people. We are constantly being moved along. Browne’s books are the relics I have brought with me from the old country. Books are no longer the necessary vehicles of text they once were; a minute on a computer will connect me with any text that exists. Plus there are kids and the price of real estate and the need to move to new cities for work every now and then — the books I own, never mind the ones I want to own, are a cluttery burden.
Why do I need Thomas Browne firsts? They are certainly not the books I reread the most. Nor are they the books I turn to for comfort. Browne’s style is thick and unnerving. “The Quincunx of Heaven runs low, and ’tis time to close the five ports of knowledge,” he writes in his conclusion to “The Garden of Cyrus,” his essay on the geometric patterns of plantations in the ancient and modern world. “We are unwilling to spin out our awaking thoughts into the phantasms of sleep, which often continueth praecogitations, making Cables of Cobwebbes and Wildernesses of handsome groves.” How many times do you have to read that sentence to understand it?
His books are not sensible and decent communication. He jars. Once, in Costa Rica, I was attacked by ants that crawled surreptitiously up my leg until, at a pheromonal signal, they bit at three different places at the exact same moment. The bites in themselves were not intense. But my nervous system had no idea how to react to the multiplicity. Where to slap first?
Reading Browne can be a little like that — a multiple sensation, not easy on the reader. But if ease and fluidity are the definition of successful communication, then television is by far the best book there is. The current model of cultural success is addiction: “I couldn’t put it down” is the ultimate compliment. It is easy to put Browne down. At times, you have to put him down. If you want something you can’t put down, pick up your phone. The bookish are a tribe in resistance now; this is the most essential change to our way of life as a people. Every person who picks up a book is consciously turning away from a screen.
Browne is not our contemporary; he is foreign to us. Reading other prose masters from roughly the same period can be a familiar experience. Michel de Montaigne is not that far from observational comedy. Jerry Seinfeld, in one of his opening bits, made the following joke: “It is pretty hard to justify, at this point in history, the existence of men and their handkerchiefs. I mean, they open it up, blow their nose in it, and then put it back in their pockets with their other valuables.” Four hundred years earlier, in his essay “Of Custom,” Montaigne remembered a friend using the exact same bit. “He asked me, what privilege this filthy excrement had, that we must carry about us a fine handkerchief to receive it, and, which was more, afterward to lap it carefully up, and carry it all day about in our pockets.”
Browne isn’t a self-justifying narcissist like Montaigne, like us. The power of Browne is the power of the sustained gaze, the delight of concentration on objects. If you take, say, some funeral urns found in a field in Norfolk, and you look at them and you keep looking at them and you try to understand and you keep trying to understand, they will change under your eyes. Browne’s best sentences possess the quality of a piece of glass held up into the light and turned.
His fascination is always tinged by the lurking suspicion that the wonders of the world, all its beauties and surprises, are temporary. “He is Dead and Buried, and by this time no Puny among the mighty Nations of the Dead; for tho he left this World not very many days past, yet every hour you know largely addeth unto that dark Society; and considering the incessant Mortality of Mankind, you cannot conceive there dieth in the whole Earth so few as a thousand an hour,” he wrote in “A Letter to a Friend.”
But he never published “A Letter to a Friend.” He never wanted to publish “Religio Medici” either. He never wanted to publish at all. He was a writer, not an author. A book is a mouthful of air turned into furniture, a portable flame, a promised endurance that fails less than other promises of endurance. But it fails. I wonder if that’s why Browne was so hesitant to publish, to put himself into books. These frail devices, so much frailer after several hundred years, offer no sustaining succor.
Borges, who considered Browne the best prose writer in the English language, described paradise as a library, but paradises are overrated. No library is ever enough and every library is already too much. The principal difference between owning books now and owning books 20 years ago is that, back then, you would pick up some magnificent unexpected book, and you knew that if you didn’t buy it, you might never see it again. What has disappeared is that potential for loss that made ownership necessary. It was like love in wartime. You would see a book and you couldn’t let it go. That is the feeling that the Thomas Browne books give me. I need to possess them because I feel they might go away, that they are in the middle of going away.
It occurs to me that all the Browne books I own, the entire set, are worth less on the open market than, say, an upholstered chair from the same period. The reason I can afford Browne (though I can’t) is because nobody else, nobody else with any money, knows what he’s worth. Antiquarian books are radically underpriced — a Shakespeare First Folio goes for much less at auction than a small Basquiat — because they aren’t particularly good at helping rich people show off.
That’s O.K. The Browne firsts were made just for me. That’s what a book is. It’s a piece of furniture useless to everybody except its reader. To everyone else, it’s a stranger.