Justin Bieber’s Flavorless Pivot to R&B, and 10 More New Songs
Every Friday, pop critics for The New York Times weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos. Just want the music? Listen to the Playlist on Spotify here (or find our profile: nytimes). Like what you hear? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com and sign up for our Louder newsletter, a once-a-week blast of our pop music coverage.
Considering he’s been one of the biggest pop stars of the 21st century since he was 15 years old, Justin Bieber has always been conspicuously uninterested in pop music. Its artificiality doesn’t suit him. Its polish is antithetical to his just-woke-up charms. And the neutrality of voice it favors — well, Bieber has different tastes. His voice is gentle and a little creamy, and he’s a clear child of 1990s R&B, so much so that at least one critic was inspired to start a campaign to #LetJustinSingRnB.
Here we are, finally. “Yummy” is a return to his … roots? A modest and lazily seductive number, it’s the most overt pivot to R&B he’s released (apart from his overlooked acoustic-ish work). He sounds comfortable, but also choppy, thanks to the particularly hiccupy patchwork that’s the hallmark of modern pop production. And while his syllables glide easily, he’s hobbled by lyrics that feel awkward and a little hasty (“Rolling eyes back in my head, make my toes curl, yeah, yeah”). When that other Justin — Timberlake — made his R&B transition all those years ago, he was bolstered by some of the most adventurous production of the day. But the choices here are safe, never testing nor encouraging Bieber. It’s a step in the right the direction, but the campaign continues. JON CARAMANICA
“Keep away from me if you can’t withstand my love,” the Jamaican-British songwriter Celeste — named the 2020 rising star at the Brit Awards — warns in a testament to obsession, driven by an insistent minor-key piano vamp derived from Nina Simone’s “Sinnerman.” Is it her desperate clinging or her lover’s fear of commitment that’s pushing them apart? She starts out almost matter-of-fact; by the chorus, she’s wailing in frustration and accusation. JON PARELES
A few weeks before hosting the Grammy Awards, here’s Alicia Keys at her most benevolent: singing about the hopes of bus-stop peddlers, single mothers, teachers, student doctors, soldiers and taxi drivers, all with a chance for solidarity through “the things that change us if we notice when we look up.” Powered by piano chords, handclaps and a male choir, she promises a chance for all to “rise up” — a secular-gospel challenge to division and cynicism. PARELES
The first posthumous single from Mac Miller is “Good News,” which tempers musical whimsy with melancholic wordplay. It’s from a forthcoming album, “Circles,” due next Friday, which Miller had been working on with the producer Jon Brion. (The new album is designed to be the companion piece to Miller’s LP “Swimming,” which he released last year, a month before his death at 26.) Miller raps with a meandering unease: “Good news, good news, good news, that’s all they wanna hear/No, they don’t like it when I’m down.” The tone is heavy, burdened, exhausted. But Miller had an ability to leaven even sentiments as dark as these. “Wake up to the moon, haven’t seen the sun in a while,” he raps, “But I heard that the sky’s still blue.” CARAMANICA
Moses Sumney foresees decades of bleak romantic prospects in “Me in 20 Years,” envisioning that “your imprint in my bed” has grown into a huge emptiness. His sweet falsetto floats above sustained but wobbly synthesizers, eventually joined by processional drums and a ghostly chorus, sounds that only expand the void around him. All he can do is urge himself to “hold out a little bit more.” PARELES
Michael Stipe’s second solo single, “Drive to the Ocean,” is a cryptic environmental dirge: “Radio the ocean/Radio the end,” it concludes. Sparse at first, it keeps sprouting new motifs and sounds — reverential organ, pizzicato strings, quasi-medieval choir harmonies, a stereo array of percussion, pitched-up voices — simulations of fecundity on a dying planet. PARELES
Devon Gilfillian, a soul songwriter based in Nashville, made his formidable debut album, “Black Hole Rainbow,” with Shawn Everett, the engineer and producer who has worked with Alabama Shakes and Perfume Genius, warping vintage sounds toward something deep and strange. “Unchained” starts the album with a gutsy vow that “Nothing’s ever going to hold me back,” driven by a hefty backbeat amid plinking bell tones, phantom voices, siren synthesizers and a bass line that dives deep into primordial murk. PARELES
Another one from the too-big-to-fail peak-reggaeton era of pop-minded production and fail-safe collaborations. This partnership, however, is notable: Daddy Yankee and Nicky Jam are two contemporary superstars whose history dates back to Puerto Rico’s reggaeton’s scene of the 1990s. They often performed together as Los Cangris, but their friendship did not survive, especially after Daddy Yankee’s global breakout hit “Gasolina” in 2004. This reunion — from the soundtrack of the forthcoming film “Bad Boys for Life” — is welcome, if a little dry. The chorus borrows its cadence from Ini Kamoze’s 1994 reggae hit “Here Comes the Hotstepper.” The name is borrowed, too, from the 1991 track by the Panamanian reggaeton star El General, one of the earliest reggaeton crossover hits. CARAMANICA
Agnes Obel’s hybrid of Minimalist chamber music and pop song is at once transparent and steely: plucked and bowed strings circling through four chords, interwoven with Obel’s silvery piano filigrees and multitracked, overlapping vocals as she lies awake longing for repose, singing an insomniac lullaby. PARELES
Joey Alexander released his first at album five years ago, at age 11, shortly after moving to the United States from Indonesia. These days, he seems to be having little trouble transitioning from child prodigy to full-grown protagonist. He is constantly adding to his improvising playbook, incorporating new moves into an increasingly seamless expression, and fleshing out what was already an impressively ambidextrous piano style. You can hear it on “Warna,” the title track from his forthcoming Verve debut, whose title means “color” in Bahasa. His all-star trio, featuring the bassist Larry Grenadier and the drummer Kendrick Scott, is augmented here by the Venezuelan percussionist Luisito Quintero, who puts his own stamp on an Alexander original built from a mix of Southeast Asian and African rhythms. GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
The eminent tenor saxophonist Charles Lloyd celebrated his 80th birthday in 2018 with a performance in his Santa Barbara, Calif. hometown, backstroking into his vast catalog with a quintet of younger musicians. To those that know his work, Lloyd’s arrival into his ninth decade was hardly jarring: He has been playing the role of jazz elder and bodhisattva for decades. At the same time, he has somehow sidestepped the effects of age: His style is one of slippery kinetics — like fast streams of water coiling through rough rock — and it seems to have kept him young. Playing his decades-old ballad “Requiem” in Santa Barbara, he sounded as poised and spry as ever, lifted by the loose coherence of his compatriots. A two-CD (or three-LP) recording of the concert, “8, Kindred Spirits: Live from the Lobero,” is due out Valentine’s Day. RUSSONELLO