What’s on TV Thursday: ‘Star Trek: Picard’ and ‘Station 19'
STAR TREK: PICARD Stream on CBS All Access. “Tea, Earl Grey, decaf.” That’s Jean-Luc Picard’s new beverage order in “Picard,” the latest “Star Trek” TV series and a return to the franchise for Patrick Stewart, who plays the title character. (For those not hip enough for “Star Trek” references: The order used to be “tea, Earl Grey, hot.”) The new show finds Picard — the erstwhile commander of the famous fictional starship known as the Enterprise — in reflective form, grappling with the past as an aged version of himself. It has a starry showrunner in the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist Michael Chabon, who will presumably bring a new kind of energy to the franchise. In a recent interview with The New York Times, Stewart said he was drawn to the new story because it explored “the profound psychological differences in the character, who felt abandoned, distrusted and unnecessary.” Stewart asked, “Where is he now? What matters to him? What control does he have over his life? Very little, as it turned out.”
RUSSELL PETERS: DEPORTED Stream on Amazon. The Canadian comic Russell Peters discusses topics like mean internet comments and the experience of getting an endoscopy in this new stand-up special, filmed at a stadium in Mumbai. Peters takes advantage of having such a large audience to banter with several of the audience members — including a man who offers an endoscopy story of his own.
SAINT LAURENT (2015) Rent on Amazon, Google Play and iTunes. The French director Bertrand Bonello is back in theaters this weekend with “Zombi Child,” a drama that flits between Haiti and France. In this biopic, Bonello flits from one decade to another to explore the life of the fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent. The movie casts multiple different actors as Laurent, painting a portrait of an over-the-top perfectionist both in his prime and toward the end of his life. “The film is a compulsively detailed swirl of moods and impressions, intent on capturing the contradictions of the man and his times,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The Times. “Observations of Saint Laurent at work and in love give way to panoramic, intricate surveys of the world of commerce and culture in which he suffered and flourished.”
STATION 19 8 p.m. on ABC. The previous season of this “Grey’s Anatomy” spinoff ended with some of its main characters — a group of firefighters — being called down to Los Angeles to battle a wildfire. The crew is back in its native Seattle at the start of Season 3, which kicks off with a crisis: A car crashes into a bar. Expect drama to come both from a high-stakes rescue and from interpersonal relationships.
THE GAYLE KING GRAMMY SPECIAL 10 p.m. on CBS. The TV anchor Gayle King interviews Lizzo, Billie Eilish, the Jonas Brothers, Lil Nas X and other musicians in this special, which airs in advance of the Grammy Awards on Sunday.