Athletic Club
MONDAY PUZZLE — What’s better than starting off our solving week with a whole bunch (that’s the collective noun) of cuddly animals? Not a lot, except that you might want to be careful around 20A. O.K., maybe 28A as well. But the rest of them? Cuddle away.
Michael Schlossberg makes his New York Times Crossword debut with this puzzle.
38A. Raising a glass to the old “punchline” about living in a hot climate: “But it’s a DRY HEAT!”
45A. Print and online solvers will see different clues, because the print clue includes an emoji that cannot currently be rendered in the game. Either way, the message on a biceps is a TAT.

30D. Great clue. “Athletic club?” sounds like it’s a gym, but with that question mark it’s really a club that one uses in athletics. That would be a baseball BAT.
47D. The casual-sounding “Mom, pop and the kids, say” gets a casual answer like FAM, but people can also use it to refer to their friends or their chosen family.
Mr. Schlossberg offers us a set of four phrases that involve animals. Two of them take the form “(BODY PART) OF THE (ANIMAL)” and two take the form “THE (ANIMAL)’S (BODY PART).”
For example, at 20A, the answer to the clue “Theme song for ‘Rocky III’” is EYE OF THE TIGER. The “Height of excellence, metaphorically,” at 28A, is THE BEE’S KNEES.
Overall, this is a very nice debut. There’s not a lot that’s new — although I liked seeing the debut of HEAR ME OUT — and there are some of the “old reliables” in there, like SRO, ETNA and EEO, as well as some partials and suffixes which bring down the quality of the fill. We’ve also seen many animal themes, but for a Monday puzzle, Mr. Schlossberg’s offering is exactly where it should be: Easy to solve, no vocabulary that is overly challenging and clues that are very straightforward. So, on balance, I thought it was fine for a Monday puzzle. I’m looking forward to seeing more from him.
The comedian Zach Sherwin’s “The Crossword Show” comes back to New York City in March at Caveat, and tickets are now on sale. If you haven’t seen the show, it’s tons of fun.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
Your thoughts?