Has Your Veterinarian Been Accused of Malpractice? It May Be Tough to Find Out
The process of finding the right veterinarian for your pet can be daunting.
This week, The New York Times detailed the case of a veterinarian in Oregon who had decades of complaints in two states from people who said animals were harmed in his care. Many of the cases had been investigated by state veterinary boards.
Yet some of his customers, including one who reported that his dog was handled so roughly last year that it had to be euthanized, said they never realized the veterinarian had been disciplined in the past.
Records on veterinarians can be difficult to track. In some states, they are tucked away on regulatory board websites. In others, the records have to be formally requested from the licensing body. Disciplinary actions are rare, and formal complaints that do not result in action against the veterinarian are typically inaccessible to the public.
What can pet owners do to make sure their pet is in safe hands? Here are some tips, compiled from interviews and industry guidelines:
Before needing the urgent services of a veterinarian, pet owners should spend time shopping around for a veterinarian that works for their family. That might begin with online research or tips from friends, but it should also include in-person visits to potential providers.
Jennifer Reba Edwards, the founder of the Colorado-based Animal Law Center, said she liked to see whether the veterinarian got on the ground with her pets and made efforts to gain the trust of the animal. If they are rushed or quickly pass her off to a veterinary technician, Ms. Edwards said, that is a red flag.
A tour of the facility can give a sense of its organization, cleanliness and overall treatment of animals. It does not hurt to ask questions: How long have they practiced? What specialties do they have? How does the facility monitor pets that have to stay overnight? What sorts of payment options do they have?
Dr. Grace A. Mengel, an assistant professor at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, suggested asking whether the veterinarian practiced low-stress handling, which includes strategies to make veterinary visits more calm for animals.
There are limited resources available for consumers to assess whether a veterinarian has a troubled past. But each state has a licensing body that investigates and doles out discipline.
In some states, such as California and New York, regulators have websites that allow pet owners to search for veterinarians by name and review their disciplinary history. Some states, however, do not have these online records; in those cases, there is little access to a veterinarian’s history of past complaints unless consumers file a request.
Online reviews can be helpful, but consumers should also be skeptical of them. One option is to check the local courts for lawsuits involving a veterinarian or facility.
Dr. Mengel said pet owners might also want to check the American Animal Hospital Association to find facilities accredited by that organization.
When it’s time to bring pets in for treatment, it is best to come with questions ready. Writing them down in advance can be especially helpful when dealing with a stressful visit that could involve bad news or difficult decisions.
For a pet with a specific problem, an owner may want to ask whether the veterinarian has experience with that issue. If surgery is contemplated, ask how many times the veterinarian has done the procedure. It may be advisable to see a specialist. Dr. Mengel said one question to ask ahead of a procedure is how the facility monitors pets under anesthesia.
It is important to share details about the pet. Has it had trouble sleeping? Has gas been a problem? Those small details that might not otherwise surface at a checkup could help a vet better assess the animal’s health.
Do not hesitate to get a second opinion about a pet’s care, especially when it comes to major decisions.
Ms. Edwards said she recently went to a veterinarian about a heart issue with her dog and got the news that the dog might live for only a few weeks. But after checking with a veterinarian with more specialization in the issue, she learned the dog could live for a couple of years with proper care.
For those who switch veterinarians, either because of a move or by choice, it is important to get a pet’s full medical history so that a new vet will have the full picture of the animal’s treatment history.
And for pet owners who may not be able to afford high-cost veterinary services, there are nonprofit organizations around the country that offer financial assistance.