Lesson of the Day: ‘The City That Cycles With the Young, the Old, the Busy and the Dead’
Featured Article: “The City That Cycles With the Young, the Old, the Busy and the Dead”
Nearly half of all journeys to school and work in Copenhagen, the capital of Denmark, take place on bicycles. And people like it that way.
In this lesson, you will learn how one city grew to become the most bike-friendly city in the world and the reasons residents love it. In a Going Further activity, you will imagine how you could transform your own town or city into a more bike-friendly environment.
Do you ever ride a bicycle? If yes, how regularly? Do you ever ride your bike to school? Do members of your family ever ride bikes to work?
In Copenhagen, 49 percent of all trips to work or school are on bicycles. In fact, in Denmark’s capital and most populated city, bikes vastly outnumber cars. In the United States, roughly 100 million Americans ride their bikes each year, but only about 14 million bike at least twice a week and less than 1 percent bike to work.
Imagine a situation where all cars and public transportation suddenly disappeared — and all you had for travel was a bicycle: How would it affect you and your family?
Take a few minutes to reflect on how life would be different: How would you feel? Do you think the transition would be easy? Or do you think getting around with only a bike would be an impossible task?
What would be the biggest challenges for you and your family? Are there any ways that riding a bike would benefit you and your community?
Write a short journal entry describing a life with only bikes to get around your town.
If you are in a classroom setting, share and discuss your journal writing with a partner.
Reflect and discuss together: In what ways would you and your community be better off with bicycles as the only mode of transportation? Would you want to live this way for a day, a month or even a year? Do you think it is possible or desirable for your town or city to become, if not a bike-only place, a more bike-friendly one?
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. Why does the article begin with the story of Natalie Gulsrud’s trip home after work? What details in the opening paragraphs illustrate Copenhagen’s commitment to bike riding?
2. Give at least three reasons residents of Copenhagen use bicycles as their primary means of transportation. What advantages do bikes have over other modes of travel?
3. What factors have influenced Copenhagen’s transformation into a bike city over the past 30 years? What role has city government played in this shift?
4. Why did Ms. Gulsrud move to Copenhagen from the Pacific Northwest? How do the bicycles parked outside of her home illustrate both the diversity and needs of cyclists in the city?
5. What can you tell about the role of bicycles in Copenhagen residents’ daily life from the photographs featured in the article? Select one image and write about how it reveals the city’s commitment to biking.
6. The article concludes:
Do you agree with Mr. Rasmussen? If you lived in Copenhagen, would you make bike riding your primary means of transportation? Are bikes rather than jet packs the future of transportation?
Choose one or both of the following two writing activities:
1.) Tell us about your views on bicycles:
2). Make a recommendation (or series of recommendations) to make your town more bike-friendly.
How can you make bike riding more common, convenient, accessible and safe?
Think imaginatively: While increasing bike riding might be your goal, consider possible changes to the physical environment in your community as well as ways to change public attitudes. Additionally, take into account the benefits of increased bike use like improved health for individuals and protecting the environment.
First, based on your own experience, assess your town’s current bike-riding use: Do many people you know ride bikes? Are the streets frequently filled with bike riders? Or rarely? How safe is it to ride a bike? How easy is it for people to get around on a bike? Are there any local policies and initiatives that support bike riding? What obstacles might prevent the increase of bike riding?
Next, research existing bike-friendly policies, initiatives and programs such as: bike-share programs in New York City, Minneapolis-St. Paul and Charlotte, N.C.; improvements to bike infrastructure (which include bicycle boulevards, bike parking, better streetlights); the creation of designated bike lanes as in Boulder, Colo.; the use of cargo bikes instead of delivery trucks; e-bikes; car-free zones; programs that promote cyclists’ safety like the “Safe Routes to Schools” program in Eugene, Ore.; educational campaigns like the “No Ridiculous Car Trips” in Malmo, Sweden; and creative ways to promote a strong bike culture that welcomes and celebrates bicycling, like National Bike Month and Bike to Work Day.
Finally, develop a recommendation or recommendations to promote a more bike-friendly community where you live. Be sure to consider your community’s needs and strengths and to anticipate concerns from residents who might be skeptical.