‘Dear Me’: A Novelist Writes to Her Future Self
If there’s a fire, my husband and I know the plan: Grab the children and the red accordion file in the hall closet before fleeing the building. The file contains mostly what you would expect: passports, birth records, Social Security cards and my husband’s certificate of United States citizenship. Also included — more unusual but equally valuable — are the four letters I’ve written to myself over the course of my life. Three have been opened and read; one remains sealed.
I wrote the first letter when I was 14, and I stole the idea from a novel. I was alone in my bedroom reading “Emily of New Moon,” a series by L. M. Montgomery, who also wrote the more famous series “Anne of Green Gables.” There are three Emily books, and although I loved Anne, I related more to Emily. Anne is a spunky extrovert, whereas Emily is more withdrawn, more serious. I was a serious, bookish child. I could, in fact, trace my childhood via the female literary characters I loved: Trixie Belden to Betsy and Tacy, Emily of New Moon to Morgaine in “The Mists of Avalon,” all the women in Doris Lessing’s “The Golden Notebook.”
I was 14, and Emily’s bone-deep loneliness resonated with me. When I read the section in the second novel where Emily writes a letter to her future self, I put down the book and did the same thing. It was an impulse; the idea of the letter delighted me. It was a grand gesture, yet of the kind an introverted kid could make alone, with no one noticing. I described the current state of my life and listed my hopes and dreams for myself 10 years later. When I finished writing, I sealed the letter, and from that moment forward, fought the desire to break the seal. I can still remember how hard it was to keep from opening the envelope at the age of 16, and 18 and 20. Talk about delayed gratification! A decade — during that stage of life — was an eternity. I wonder, now, what I was hoping to find in those pages. A truth about myself that, if learned, would allow me to be happy? An answer to the question of who I was, and whether I mattered?
I brought that sealed letter to college, and then graduated from college and brought it to my first apartment in Manhattan, a two-bedroom I shared with a friend. I started graduate school. I was still dating my college boyfriend, although he lived in Connecticut, and we were finding long distance tricky. It’s a miracle I didn’t lose the envelope during those long years, but I suppose the truth was that the letter had become serious business to me.
I opened it on the morning of my 24th birthday; I’d slept with the envelope beside the bed so it would be the first thing I saw upon waking. I made my boyfriend leave the room, so I could read it alone. It felt the way Christmas morning feels when you’re 6: deeply magical and filled with potential. When I unfolded the pages, though, I couldn’t believe what I read. My 24-year-old self was horrified. It turns out I was an absolute fool at the age of 14. My 14-year-old self had two main concerns for her future self: 1) that she not be fat, and 2) that she had found love. The language was flowery; I “beseeched” myself to be a good (and thin) person.
Now the letter seems mostly funny and endearing to me. It makes me sad that I was so concerned with the shape of my body and how I might someday deserve the love of a man, but I also understand (and have the proof in writing) that we are all fools, in one way or another, at the age of 14. But my 24-year-old self was disgusted and disappointed. I’d waited a decade, for what? My younger self had let my older self down. When my boyfriend read the loopy handwritten pages, he laughed out loud, and I glowered. I wrote a letter to my 34-year-old self later that day; I wanted to prove that I was more than I’d shown earlier. That I wasn’t silly or boy-obsessed. If these letters were a blueprint for who I was becoming, I wanted to make clear that I was becoming a person of substance.
The letter I wrote that day breaks my heart a little when I read it now. The 24-year old who wrote it is deeply worried about the next 10 years. She believes that the stakes are so high, that if she fails during this period, she will be a failure. She is scared she won’t measure up, although it’s unclear to what standard, or who set the bar. She is specific about what she expects during those 10 years: that she will marry her college boyfriend, that they will have a child, that she will finish and publish the “Gigi novel” she is working on. That she will find a job either in publishing or as a high school teacher, to pay the bills while she writes.
Part of the reason I feel badly for her is because none of those plans came to fruition. I paid my bills by working as a personal assistant, first for a self-help writer and then for a rock musician. My college boyfriend and I became engaged after nearly a decade together, and then three months before our wedding he decided he wasn’t ready to get married. All I can remember saying to him during that awful time was that he wasn’t “getting married,” he was marrying me. I felt the distinction was key, but he didn’t. We broke up, and for almost a year I felt so much pain that my skin ached while I walked. My “Gigi novel” was rejected by 80 agents, and I put it in a drawer. I wrote another novel, and although I found an agent for that book, it went unpublished, too. In my early 30s, I would fall in love again, with an Englishman who made me laugh, and who is now my husband. And at the start of our relationship, I sold my third novel to a publisher.
There were surprises during that decade, too. My parents — after years of battle — announced they were getting divorced, and then changed their minds inside of a month. I met and started a relationship with a half sister I’d never known about. My 24-year-old self wasn’t wrong about the stakes being high during that decade; that’s why I feel sadness for the stressed girl writing down her futile plans while her boyfriend waited in the next room. The decade ahead would be filled with uncertainty and hard work and hope and crying alone in bed where no one could see.
One of the lessons in these letters is that our lives have chapters — I just happen to have an envelope to mark each of mine. I can see the turmoil of early adulthood, when so much seems possible and yet while you’re trying to figure out which life door to approach and how to pry it open, a trapdoor appears under your feet and you end up in a future you didn’t plan for. As we get older, there are less obvious choices. I was married and published when I opened the letter on my 34th birthday — alone, in bed, which is my letter-opening routine — and was able to shake my head with wonder at the divergence between my younger self’s plans and the reality that had come to pass. The letter I wrote later that day expressed a hope for children, and for a deepening in my work and my marriage. I hoped for financial stability. I hoped to be better, in the arenas I already inhabited.
The first time I wasn’t anxious about opening a letter was on my 44th birthday. I finally felt embedded in my life. I recognized the woman in the pages of the letter, and the personal terrain she had done everything in her power to cultivate. A different human wrote to the 24-year-old me than the one who wrote to the 44-year-old, but there are aspects of her in these later ages. I am stubborn. When I know what I want, I don’t give up (whether I get it or not is not the point). I am still a person who reads novels for solace, and is delighted by the ideas in them; I am happy to give my teenage self a virtual high-five for picking up a pen and writing herself a secret letter. When I was very young I declared two goals for my life: to be a mother, and to be a writer. Both have come to pass.
I don’t remember what I wrote in the letter to my 54-year-old self; I will find out in six years. I no longer burn with the desire to open the letter early, but I love opening it. Those birthdays still give me a Christmas-morning thrill. Who will I find in the envelope? Will I be surprised? I take time crafting that next letter, outlining my life now, and considering my dream life a decade hence. I wonder how many letters I will have by the end of my life. I love the idea of the oldest version of me — how old will she be? — reading through the pages, probably laughing at how young and serious I was, in every letter.