What’s on TV Saturday: Billie Eilish and ‘When Harry Met Sally’
AUSTIN CITY LIMITS: BILLIE EILISH 11 p.m. on PBS. The 18-year-old pop singer Billie Eilish, who took home five trophies from last week’s Grammy Awards, including for best new artist, is featured in this hourlong concert. Her set list is largely made up of songs from her debut album, “When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?” (which won album of the year), including the dark, assertive pop hits “Bad Guy” and “You Should See Me In a Crown.” Popular singles like “Ocean Eyes” are featured as well. Though she is a young artist, Eilish has been redefining the pop music genre for years, Jon Pareles wrote for The New York Times, saying that “she’s sullen, depressive, death-haunted, sly, analytical and confrontational, all without raising her voice.”
2020: RACE TO SAVE THE PLANET 8 p.m. on The Weather Channel. Three months ago, eight presidential candidates sat down with Weather Channel meteorologists to discuss climate change, one of the biggest threats to America’s economy, national security and the planet’s longevity. The show is back for a second installment, but this time with a particular focus on environmental justice, and a modified cast. Democratic and Republican candidates who weren’t interviewed in the first installment have a voice in this one, including Senator Amy Klobuchar; the former New York City mayor, Michael Bloomberg; Tom Steyer; and Andrew Yang.
WHEN HARRY MET SALLY … (1989) Stream on Hulu and Sling TV. Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes and YouTube. Harry Burns (Billy Crystal) and Sally Albright (Meg Ryan) have been best friends for 11 years, and they want to prove that a single man and a single woman can have a platonic relationship. The two are clearly perfect for each other, though, so it’s easy to predict where the relationship ends up. The rest of the movie consists of romantic Manhattan scenes, scattered with hilarious conversations about love and sex between Harry, Sally, and their best friends, played by Bruno Kirby and Carrie Fisher. Directed by Rob Reiner with a screenplay by Nora Ephron, “When Harry Met Sally” redefined the romantic comedy for a new generation.
SEVEN BRIDES FOR SEVEN BROTHERS (1954) Stream on BroadwayHD. Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. Shortly after Adam Pontipee (Howard Keel) brings his new wife, Milly (Jane Powell), to his home on the Oregon frontier, his six unruly brothers decide they’d also like to get married. They ask their newlywed brother for advice: He suggests they kidnap women from a nearby town and bring them home. Milly teaches the brothers manners and the rules of courtship. Though Stephanie Zacharek, writing in The Times, once called this “Stockholm Syndrome in Cinemascope,” she also wrote that this musical includes “one of the most rousing dance numbers ever put onscreen.”