Iran, Carlos Ghosn, Australia: Your Friday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
In a move that Iran’s leaders may interpret as an act of war, the United States killed Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the powerful commander of that country’s Revolutionary Guards Corps, in a drone strike this morning at Baghdad International Airport.
The killing — which the Pentagon said was justified by a need to prevent future Iranian attacks — is a dramatic escalation of President Trump’s “maximum pressure” campaign against Iran, which began with economic sanctions.
Analysts and officials predicted retaliatory attacks from Iran and its proxies, and critics of Mr. Trump’s Iran policy called his strike a reckless escalation with consequences that could ripple violently throughout the Middle East. Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama had both rejected killing General Suleimani, fearing it would lead to war.
Details: The drone strike hit two cars carrying General Suleimani, who had arrived from Syria, and several officials with Iranian-backed militias as they were leaving the Baghdad airport. The strike came days after American forces bombed three outposts of an Iranian-supported militia in Iraq and Syria, in retaliation for an attack that killed an American contractor last Friday.
Background: American officials consider General Suleimani, the commander of the Revolutionary Guards’ elite Quds Force, responsible for the deaths of hundreds of American soldiers during the Iraq War and for hostile Iranian activities throughout the Middle East.
Justification: After the strike, the Pentagon said that General Suleimani had “orchestrated attacks on coalition bases in Iraq over the last several months,” including one that killed the American contractor. It also said he had “approved the attacks” this week on the U.S. Embassy compound in Baghdad, in which protesters had broken into a secure area and set fires.
Response: Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, called the attack “extremely dangerous & a foolish escalation” in a Twitter post. “The US bears responsibility for all consequences of its rogue adventurism,” he added.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey received overwhelming approval from Parliament on Thursday to dispatch troops to Libya, where an independent monitoring organization says Turkey has already sent Syrian proxy fighters. It’s an effort to prop up a U.N.-backed government that is under siege from rival proxy forces supported by Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates.
The Libyan campaign highlights Mr. Erdogan’s desire to increase Turkish claims to power and natural resources in the eastern Mediterranean. And, partly because Libya is a former Ottoman territory, it’s a way for him stoke nationalism at home amid flagging support — and speculation that he may call a snap election this fall.
Response: Turkey’s newly aggressive foreign policy has unnerved Greece and the European Union — which has punished Turkey with sanctions for its exploratory drilling in Cypriot waters — as well as the United States, which stores about 50 tactical nuclear weapons at a Turkish air base that Mr. Erdogan has threatened to close. President Trump warned Turkey on Thursday against “foreign interference” in Libya.
Looking ahead: Turkey’s Libya campaign may start a new conflict with Russia, which has partnered with Turkey in Syria and has recently sold it an advanced antiaircraft missile system.
Carlos Ghosn, the former chairman of Nissan and Renault, has promised to speak with the news media next week. We’ll have plenty of questions about how he slipped out of Japan ahead of a trial later this year on criminal charges of financial wrongdoing — an escape, our correspondent writes, that has all the elements of a Hollywood-style thriller.
The Turkish authorities, meanwhile, on Thursday questioned seven people, including four pilots, about the role they might have played in helping Mr. Ghosn escape from Tokyo to Beirut, via Istanbul, on a private jet. Lebanon also received an Interpol arrest warrant for Mr. Ghosn, and prosecutors raided his Tokyo home.
And in Paris, a senior official said that Mr. Ghosn — who holds French, Brazilian and Lebanese passports — would not be extradited if he traveled to France.
Catch up: Mr. Ghosn is accused of underreporting his compensation, shifting his personal financial losses to Nissan and using funds from Renault to organize parties at the Palace of Versailles.
He’s a well-compensated lawyer with a knighthood, an Oxford degree and a London address. Yet he may end up leading a political party that has been criticized for losing touch with its working-class roots in England’s industrial north.
Our London bureau chief, Mark Landler, has a story on Keir Starmer, the early front-runner in the race to lead the Labour Party after Jeremy Corbyn steps down in March.
On the surface, Mr. Starmer’s popularity is hard to explain: Boris Johnson’s Conservative Party recently made damaging inroads among once-loyal Labour voters in the Midlands and the North, which led many to assume that Labour’s rank and file would turn to a leader from those areas.
But those same Labour voters apparently prize management experience and electability, qualities many felt Mr. Corbyn lacked. And it probably helps Mr. Starmer’s case that he comes from a humble background and prefers not to be called “sir.”
When the Italian soccer star Mario Balotelli, above, left Marseille and joined a club in Brescia, Italy, he took a substantial pay cut. But the city had a singular attraction: It was where he grew up and had always wanted to play.
Balotelli’s only reservation? Italian soccer, embroiled in racism scandals, had not always been quite so welcoming.
Our chief soccer correspondent, Rory Smith, traveled to Brescia for this deeply reported story about Balotelli, Brescia and Italian soccer culture. In the country’s top league, he writes, the 29-year-old Balotelli “is the bellwether and the test case, co-opted as territory in a culture war. There is always someone to make him feel like it is not his home.”
Spain: Catalonia’s biggest separatist party said it would abstain in upcoming confidence votes in Parliament, a move that brings Pedro Sánchez, the interim prime minister, closer to his goal of forming a Socialist-led coalition government. The first vote is expected over the weekend.
Israel: Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu won a reprieve ahead of a March election when the Supreme Court on Thursday rejected a petition asking it to rule on whether a candidate for prime minister charged with serious crimes could form a new government.
Australia: Tens of thousands of people were forced to evacuate their homes on Thursday, as the authorities warned of massive blazes this weekend — possibly the worst yet in an already catastrophic fire season that has killed nine people in the past week alone.
India: As the authorities struggle to contain huge nationwide protests over a contentious new citizenship law, accounts are emerging of abuse meted out by police officers.
Snapshot: Next week in Paris, the Tokyo-based architect, designer, restaurateur and chef Shinichiro Ogata will open a multistory complex, above, that includes a tea salon, a restaurant, a pastry shop, a bar and an art gallery.
Preview of 2020 gadgets: Expect more wearables and 5G service, our tech columnist writes. Alexa, Siri and Google Assistant may even start cooperating.
What we’re reading: This essay in The New Yorker on the highs and lows of raising a toddler. “Love this so much,” says Emma G. Fitzsimmons, our new City Hall bureau chief. “We need more writing on parenting by fathers. It shouldn’t be viewed as (more) women’s work.”
Cook: Take the time this weekend to make perfect pancakes with crisp, fritter-like edges.
Go: A revival of Arthur Miller’s “Death of a Salesman” is playing in London’s West End.
Read: Two books by the Polish fantasy writer Andrzej Sapkowski, whose work is the basis of the Netflix series “The Witcher,” debut on our monthly audio fiction best-seller list.
Smarter Living: Tired of going to the gym (or berating yourself for not)? Here are five cheap(ish) things to bring the gym to you.
The New York Times has been reporting on how your smartphone can cost you privacy.
Most recently, our Opinion desk published “One Nation, Tracked,” an investigation into the location data industry that shows how companies quietly collect and profit off the precise movements of smartphone users.
But there’s a new vulnerability coming.
Apple is including a new chip in its iPhone 11s that will enable ultra wideband wireless communication with other phones and smart devices. More phone makers, like Samsung, appear ready to launch their own UWB (UWB chips are already in N.F.L. players’ shoulder pads, to gather metrics and inform computer animated replays).
The new short-range technology could bring a host of conveniences: unlocking your car or front door as you approach and relocking when you exit, increasing the speed of phone-to-phone transfers and the like. All faster than Bluetooth.
But it could also make your location trackable even more precisely. In stores, retailers could “see” where you paused in their aisles, possibly keeping track of not only what you bought, but what you might have considered.
And if past experience is a guide, law enforcement could also draw on the data.