Bolsonaro’s War on Truth
SÃO PAULO, Brasil — On Jan. 13, a documentary film I directed, “The Edge of Democracy,” was nominated for an Academy Award for best documentary feature. In the film, I intertwine the rise and fall of the Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff presidencies and the election of Jair Bolsonaro with my own family story. I am the same age as Brazil’s democracy, and much of the country’s deep polarization mirrors my family divisions.
Following the nomination, my team was flooded with messages on social media congratulating us. But our government responded differently.
The secretary of culture, Roberto Alvim, said, “If it was a fiction category, the nomination would be correct.” President Bolsonaro said that “for those who like what vultures eat, it’s a good film.” He later admitted he hadn’t seen the film, but that didn’t stop the legion of trolls on social media who follow him from parroting the fake news accusation.
By Jan. 16, Mr. Alvim was making headlines of his own. In an online video to promote a national arts prize, he proclaimed: “The Brazilian art of the next decade will be heroic and national. It will be endowed with great capacity for emotional involvement and will be equally imperative, since it is deeply tied to the urgent aspirations of our people, or else it will be nothing.”
The speech seemed almost identical to one given by the Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels in May 1933. A portrait of Mr. Bolsonaro hung behind Mr. Alvim, while “Lohengrin,” an opera by Hitler’s favorite composer, Richard Wagner, could be heard playing in the background.
Mr. Alvim was ousted a day later, following public outcry, including the vehement condemnation from the German and Israeli Embassies. Yet I believe he was fired not for having views the administration found objectionable, but rather because he had been too public about their shared views. This is but one example of how Brazil’s democracy is inching ever closer to the edge.
The Bolsonaro administration’s systematic assault on truth has now taken a troubling turn. On Tuesday, federal prosecutors charged the American journalist Glenn Greenwald with cybercrimes. The charges stem from a series of articles published in The Intercept Brasil, which he co-founded, that exposed what appeared to be collusion among the main figures in Operation Car Wash, an anti-corruption investigation, which led to the conviction of Mr. da Silva.
For five years Brazil has been mired in a drama rife with unexpected twists. In 2016, Ms. Rousseff, our first female president, was impeached on an obscure technicality. News organizations and social media propagated the perception that she was being impeached for corruption, which a large sector of the population happily believed. In the week of her impeachment, three of the five most shared news articles on Facebook were false.
Two years later, Mr. da Silva, the widely popular former president who was the favorite candidate for the 2018 presidential election, was barred from running and thrown in jail in what seemed like the perfect ending to a long-running reality show.
Sérgio Moro, the judge responsible for Mr. da Silva’s imprisonment, was rewarded with an appointment as justice minister after Mr. Bolsonaro won the presidency. The election of Mr. Bolsonaro, an obscure, homophobic and misogynistic far-right-wing congressman, was itself a result of an extraordinary disinformation campaign on social media. Over 98 percent of his electorate was exposed to one or more fake-news headlines during the campaign, and nearly 90 percent of his supporters believed they were true, according to study by Avaaz, an online nonprofit organization. His government has mastered the art of manipulating the truth.
In “The Edge of Democracy” I trace Brazil’s political history in recent decades through my own family story. My grandfather co-founded one of the country’s largest construction companies, which was one of the contractors investigated by Operation Car Wash. My parents, who were left-wing militants, were arrested during the dictatorship (1964-1985) and, then, spent years underground doing grass-roots work with students and workers in the south of Brazil.
Their ideas made me believe that a better Brazil, one that is less unequal and not ruled by corrupt and authoritarian elites, was possible. I voted for Mr. da Silva with the hope that he would bring about much-needed political change. Then I saw him forming alliances with the country’s oligarchy, a grim reminder of the practices and the corruption he claimed to end.
People around the world who have watched the documentary have identified with my fears and hopes, and my attempt to discern the facts from all the fiction shaping Brazil’s future. They connect with my film because they see their democracies under a similar peril. What initially felt like isolated cases (in India, Brazil and Turkey) has turned into a global epidemic. The film criticizes leaders who attempt to silence divergent thinking. Maybe this is the reason some authoritarian far-right politicians, in Brazil and abroad, want to brand journalistic efforts to unveil the truth as fiction and fake news.
It is interesting that “Lügenpresse,” or “Lying press,” was a slogan widely used in Germany during the Third Reich to discredit any journalist who disagreed with the government’s position.
Efforts to discredit an honest press have been particularly devastating in my country. However, the influence of disinformation campaigns extends well beyond partisan politics. Since 2019, far-right elites and religious conservative groups have been waging a culture war at levels not seen since the hard years of military dictatorship.
For example, the government characterized the Brazilian Carnival, a source of great pride in our culture, as a degenerate party. Some of our greatest artists have been attacked, school books are being rewritten and funds for TV series and film projects about L.G.B.T.Q. themes were slashed. More than 30 works of art have been censored, self-censored or canceled. The culture war reached new heights in December when a production company, Porta dos Fundos, was attacked with Molotov cocktails for portraying Jesus as gay in a satirical Christmas TV show, “The First Temptation of Christ.”
There is no visible light at the end of the tunnel in this culture war that seeks to censor liberal and progressive values and the destruction of the truth to impose a tropical fascism. As I point out in “The Edge of Democracy,” the elite got tired of playing democracy. As the history of Nazism reminds us, the elites who were silent in the face of the advance of authoritarianism ultimately ended up swallowed by it. Extinction is the price of omission.