Preserving Historic Buildings
To the Editor:
Re “Historic Preservation Is Hurting Cities,” by Binyamin Appelbaum (Editorial Observer, Jan. 27):
Historic preservationists around the country were dismayed that The Times would publish a broadside against preservation based on the complaints of one resident in one Washington historic district who was (initially) denied the right to place solar panels on his rooftop.
First, the suggestion that historic preservation interferes with the ability of communities to respond to the climate crisis is untrue. Historic preservation is one of the most successful strategies for urban sustainability that any city can employ. Reusing existing building stock conserves energy and avoids the high environmental costs of new construction.
And sustainability is but one benefit of historic preservation. A new report by PlaceEconomics elucidates 24 benefits of preservation, including jobs, environmental responsibility, affordable housing, economic stability and density — not to mention preserving the uniqueness and livability of our neighborhoods.
Finally, the goal of preservation is not to “freeze” properties in time, but to manage change in a way that preserves community character. It is an effective way to ensure the sustainability, livability and economic vibrancy of changing cities, and it can and should be a movement as dynamic as the places it saves. Let’s not obscure the many benefits of historic preservation by repeating common misconceptions.
Paul Edmondson
Washington
The writer is president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
To the Editor:
While I agree that we need to be sustainable and harness the power of the sun on as many buildings as we possibly can, even on historic ones, I take issue with the blanket statement “Historic preservation, in practice, is not about preserving history. It is about preserving the lifestyle of an affluent urban elite.”
I am an archaeologist and a historic preservationist and have worked in many different facets of the field. There is absolutely no way in which historic preservation is only about preserving the lifestyles of the affluent; historic preservation is about learning how people lived, how they built, how they decorated and ate and socialized. There is as much value in learning about the common tradesman as there is the affluent.
That being said, I am not such a purist that I don’t support the use of solar panels on private homes. I don’t believe that they should be so visible that they take away from the general aesthetic of a historic district, but I have also seen ways in which they don’t have to. It is unfortunate that Washington officials would be unwilling to budge for something so important for our collective future. On the other hand, people who can afford to live in historic districts generally do so because they like the aesthetic of living in a historic neighborhood.
For the sake of saving the planet, I say, Let them ruin it for the purists. But if you can afford it (and you probably can), camouflage is greatly appreciated.
Kate McCourt
Great Falls, Mont.
To the Editor:
I live in a local historic district that operates much as Binyamin Appelbaum describes, with a historic district commission of architects and aesthetic purists obsessing over minutiae, brushing off the urgent need for affordable housing and mobilization against the climate crisis, and safeguarding a sterile, static version of the past.
It is a neighborhood that was spared from destruction by New Haven’s infamous “urban renewal” bulldozers through the intervention of preservationists who understood the built environment as not just a collection of buildings but as a fragile ecosystem, and the mission of historic preservation as not just conserving architectural details but as stewarding the social and cultural fabric of intact traditional neighborhoods.
It is troubling to see historic preservation turn away from this humanistic ethos into a set of arcane bureaucratic procedures that appear to the layperson as reactionary, elitist and contrary to social solidarity. “Putting people first” is the preservation ethos that saved my neighborhood from annihilation and to which I will always subscribe.
Aaron Goode
New Haven, Conn.
The writer is co-founder of Walk New Haven Cultural Heritage Tours.
To the Editor:
To say that historic preservation exacerbates global warming by obstructing change for the better is a reductionist stance for a field that has fought to revitalize and defend our nation’s most treasured sites. If this position is to be taken seriously, then Binyamin Appelbaum must broaden his blame to encompass thousands of homeowners’ associations that impose similar restrictions regardless of a building’s pedigree.
The larger question at hand is who decides what is worthy of preservation in the first place? The preservation process democratizes this vital question. Framing historic preservation as a detrimental regime serving the needs of the affluent is irresponsible. A more apt description is that preservation acts as a forum for communities to engage and negotiate our shared cultural resources.
This rough and rowdy attempt to define preservation as an instrument of class conflict is as convenient as it is misguided. Are we honestly to believe that limits on renovation are causing the proliferation of tent cities? Could there be other factors aside from preservation at fault? If only my window choices had that much power.
Andre P. Jauregui
New York
To the Editor:
Binyamin Appelbaum sets up a straw man in order to advance an attack on preservation that has been mounted in recent years by a number of developers and economists. His neighborhood in the Capitol Hill District has some of the toughest zoning regulations in the country and is not at all reflective of the rather weak or nonexistent protections in most of the country.
In centering his argument on solar panels, Mr. Appelbaum seeks to try tug at environmentalists’ heartstrings, when, in fact, preservation has been shown to be far greener than new construction.
It is the very nature of the Capitol Hill District’s historic character that has made it such a desirable and therefore expensive place to live. Indeed, those cities that preserve and maintain their historic character count among the most desirable places to live.
Here in upstate New York, Hudson and Troy have experienced a booming revival thanks to their beautiful architecture and human scale, while Albany, which for generations has been only too happy to demolish any building, no matter how important, remains far behind.
Maintaining the character of walkable neighborhoods that support local businesses has everything to do with preservation of a habitable planet, and those who do not care about the urban environment are much the same as those who do not care about the natural environment.
Peter Lacovara
Albany, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Of course, the requirements that landmarks preservation commissions impose on buildings in historic districts can seem nit-picky, but preserving the charming character is one of the things that keeps a neighborhood like mine, Greenwich Village, from turning into a generic Midtown. When tourists come here, they are looking for the quaint Village they’ve seen in movies or read about, which is fading away. We are currently in the midst of fighting to protect the historic buildings that provide affordable housing from being demolished so that hotels, office towers and luxury high-rises can rise in their stead.Apartments in many of these high-rises remain unsold or are owned by investors who don’t live there.
As for environmental changes, like solar panels, there are ways to integrate them into historic buildings. I know of several instances in which New York’s Landmarks Preservation Commission permitted structural changes to historic townhouses as long as they weren’t visible from the street.
Nine years ago, our large co-op building had to replace our bronze window frames with aluminum ones to restore the look of our building when it was constructed in 1954, but at the same time we installed green roof plantings and a cogeneration system, and switched from heating oil to natural gas. Yes, you can preserve history and still have progress.
Donna Mastrandrea
New York