My Culture Is Not Super Bowl Entertainment
A few weeks ago, as I walked through security at the Minneapolis-St. Paul airport, a T.S.A. agent grabbed onto my braids and snapped them like reins. “Giddy up!” she said.
I’m a Native American woman, and my hair is part of my spirit. The woman treated me like a horse.
This lack of respect is unfortunately common. Varying degrees of disrespect — from slurs to theft of land — are part of daily life for indigenous people in the United States. As an Ojibwe, I grew up knowing that most Americans have little to no idea who we are.
On Sunday, the Kansas City Chiefs will play the San Francisco 49ers in the Super Bowl. Chiefs fans will don headdresses and mark themselves with red paint to perform the “tomahawk chop,” a wordless chant complete with a swinging motion of the forearm, caricaturing what they believe is Native American culture.
The 49ers aren’t much better. They are named after the Gold Rushers, who played a major role in forcing out indigenous Californians from their lands in the 19th century.
While many Americans were outraged about my braids being pulled — and the Transportation Security Administration apologized — that same sense of indignation doesn’t seem to transfer to football team names like the Chiefs and the Washington Redskins or traditions like the tomahawk chop. Pointing to a Native American friend who is “cool with it” or claiming a vague, full-blooded ancestor doesn’t cover desperate fan justifications either.
There are 574 federally recognized and 63 state-recognized tribal nations in the United States. We didn’t die out after 1900, despite what school textbooks, mainstream portrayals of Native Americans and President Trump’s dehumanizing digs against Senator Elizabeth Warren would have you believe.
A 2005 resolution by the American Psychological Association recognized research that found that Native American team mascots and symbols harm our children’s self-esteem. Racial stereotypes are harmful, no matter the intent. That should have been more than enough for a bunch of adults to jettison those stereotypes, but 15 years later, we’re still having the same conversation.
There is deep reconciliation America has yet to do with indigenous peoples. Our treaty rights are still being violated, most recognizably in failures to fund Indian health care and education, services that were guaranteed in exchange for land that now makes up the United States.
Our land and sacred places are destroyed. Our life expectancy is 5.5 years lower than the total population. An epidemic of missing and murdered indigenous women is happening throughout the country.
As history repeats itself, Native Americans push to have our truth told, just as we fight for our children, our health care, education, tribal sovereignty, land rights, and environmental and cultural protection.
When you aren’t viewed as a real person, it is a lot easier for others to deny you your rights. We have many problems plaguing our communities, and dehumanization is one.
We are not mascots. We are not fallen noble savages. Native Americans pass through airports. We serve in Congress. We take a stand against environmental destruction and cultural eradication. We fight for our children to stay within tribal communities. We campaign for law enforcement agencies, states and the federal government to take violence against Native American women seriously. Despite centuries of genocide, we are still here.
Can you name the tribes within the boundaries of your home state? Do you know anything about their culture and history?
Treating a person like a horse is unacceptable, but so is exploiting the culture of oppressed people for entertainment. Nostalgic racism, no matter how well intentioned, causes harm to living Native Americans. We live in your midst. I hope for empathy and push for change.