I’ve Inherited a Fatal Disease. Can I Tell My Sister’s Children About Their Risk?
I have been struck by a fatal disease, inherited from my father. I have children, who know they have a 50-50 chance of inheriting the disease from me.
I have several siblings. One has children of her own. She has so far refused to be tested on the off chance that she, too, has the gene. This means that her children don’t know anything about the cause of my disease. There are interventions that could protect any future grandchildren, but her children don’t know they are in danger of passing the disease along.
I have been tempted to tell my sister’s children myself, but I know this would result in a major breach in our relationship (a real loss to me). What is my ethical responsibility here? Name Withheld
A diagnosis like yours lands especially hard because it’s so definitive: no reprieve for good behavior, no appeal to a higher authority, no means to secure clemency. Your sister is far from alone in wanting to avoid such news. Prince Myshkin, in Dostoyevsky’s “The Idiot,” thought it was 10 times as hard to die when death was certain: Put a soldier in front of a cannon, and he could still hope for the best; give him a definite sentence of death, and he’d fall apart. Sure enough, when another character, young Ippolit, learns that he’s dying of consumption, he falls into mortal despair and seeks to hurry his end.
All of which is to say that I’m sorry your medical condition should be compounded with this family quandary. Before hashing out your ethical responsibility, though, we should be clear about the pertinent facts. We’re talking about a disorder that you’ll get if you’ve inherited the mutation from either of your parents and that doesn’t produce symptoms until after you’re grown and able to reproduce. (In medical terms: an autosomal dominant genetic disorder with adult onset.) That’s the case with conditions like Huntington’s disease and certain forms of A.L.S. and leukodystrophy.
Given that your sister’s chances are 50 percent (and that it’s vanishingly unlikely that her partner has the gene), her children’s chances are 25 percent. Now, if she is older than you and hasn’t been struck by the disease, the likelihood that she has the gene decreases incrementally with the passage of time. But the risk that her children have it, and could pass it along to their children, remains substantial. And though the disease is currently incurable, potential grandchildren could indeed be protected — through embryo screening — if an assisted reproductive technology is used.
The trouble isn’t that your sister refuses to be tested. That’s her choice. (You don’t say whether you made a different one.) So long as she is prepared for the eventuality — so long as she has taken account of the possibility in thinking about her future and her family’s future — the choice isn’t in itself problematic. The trouble is that she wants to prevent her children from knowing what she already knows. By keeping them in the dark, she’s robbing them of the ability to make their own choices. And here’s a critical point. Even if they declined to be tested themselves, simply knowing that they’re at risk would enable them to protect any children they might have in the future, through “nondisclosure testing.” Clinics can conduct pre­implantation embryo screening without sharing the results with the at-risk parent.
If your sister has the gene, she may well become symptomatic before her children have children, and everyone will know what they need to know. But there’s no guarantee of this. (Huntington’s, for example, has an average onset age of 40, but plenty of patients aren’t struck until 50 or older; roughly 10 percent don’t get it until they’re over 60.) So what she’s doing could have grave consequences. There’s a comparison to be made with people who know they have a significant chance of being H.I.V.-­positive, prefer not to be tested and then proceed to engage in unprotected sex. Preserving your own uncertainty is defensible; putting others in jeopardy is not.
As painful as a breach in your relationship with your sister would be, it’s clear that your sister’s misguided plan is itself weighing heavily on you. Urge her to level with her children about the facts. (She could implore them not to tell her if they are tested and get a positive result.) Were she still to refuse, tell them yourself. If your relationship with her suffers, you’ll be paying unjustly the cost of a responsible decision.
I do hope your sister has a change of heart. We’re highly fallible when it comes to forecasting our feelings. For what it’s worth, research suggests that after an adjustment period, people who, aware they’re at risk for a disease like Huntington’s, are tested and learn they’re positive don’t become any more anxious or depressed. Ippolit, Dostoyevsky’s young consumptive, himself reconsiders: Though he remains a turbulent soul, he recognizes that a life curtailed is not a life without significance; he plainly wants to see what his remaining days have in store.
I have two siblings, a brother and a sister. I have been extraordinarily close to my sister, who is suffering from a terminal disease. Some time ago, we lost our parents in quick succession, and as a result, we became closer. We have also been constant allies in disputes with our dysfunctional extended family and with our brother, who has fewer resources and a different approach to life altogether. Since she became sick, however, our relationship has become strained. Her husband is intensely disliked by both my brother and me. Her husband has made this experience all the more challenging, and while he’s very good to her, he’s absolutely terrible to us. She is also deeply protective of him, which makes it difficult for us to spend time with her or them because she always wants him around “to take care of her.”
I recently asked my sister to take an extended vacation to our ancestral family home, which is for the most part owned by her and me. It was to be just the two of us. At the last minute, she and her husband decided to have him join for the entirety of the vacation, which alienated me and further strained our relationship. During this trip, my sister also disclosed that she plans to leave her interest in our family home to her husband. I shared that I felt upset by this, because our ancestors and our parents would want me to have it. By leaving it to him, it would most likely alienate me from this special place. I offered to buy him out of her interest upon her passing, but she would not agree. This house is historically very important to us, and my sister and I have worked through adversity to ensure we could keep it within our family.
I feel betrayed and think she is being selfish. While I respect her right to make her own decisions about her affairs, her behavior brings up a lot of painful and resentful feelings that I have worked hard to quiet about my family. I feel sad that she is dying, and I empathize with her situation, but I can’t help feeling angry and upset. While I want to be there for her and be a good sibling, I do not want to sacrifice my own emotional health and well-being. My older brother, who is not involved in the house, agrees with me. She has said, “It’s my decision.” I worry that when she dies, I will end up hating her and will be subjected to years of unhappiness with her widower and, ultimately, will end up selling a place that matters a lot to me. How can I best handle this difficult situation? Name Withheld
People who are dying don’t thereby gain the right to be indifferent to the interests and concerns of their families. It is natural to suppose that the house, as the home of your ancestors, means more to you than to your brother-­in-­law. Your sister’s apparent indifference to this is unfortunate, as is the fact that “It’s my decision” is the only explanation she’ll offer.
But given the fraught conversations you’ve had, she might think that explaining her decision would only upset you more. And letting her know that you dislike her husband — even if your dislike is well founded — probably hasn’t helped, either. Perhaps, as your rancor has been rekindled, your sister has come to find you taxing to be around, especially without the buffer of her doting husband. (That might explain why he showed up for what you thought would be some time à deux with her.)
So let’s also be sure that you’re giving sufficient weight to her interests and concerns. Maybe she thinks you will, in the end, work out a share with her husband that allows you each to make use of house without crossing paths. Maybe she wants him to be able to decide whether to accept your buyout offer. Or maybe she finds consolation in his having the house as a kind of memorial to her — and would prefer that, if your differences remain irreconcilable, you sold your stake to him.
As you make plain, your resentment about the house is part of a larger package of resentments, and resentments can put blinkers on us. Even as you “empathize with her situation,” you’re put out that a dying woman should put such store in a devoted and protective spouse; you place scare quotes around her expressed desire to have him around to take care of her. Solely because you and your sister can’t come to terms about this inheritance, you anticipate that you’ll end up “hating her.” It all invites the thought that your sister may have a very different perspective on what’s going on. You think she’s selfish; ask yourself whether you’ve given her reason to think the same of you.