Berkeley Law School Drops Boalt Name Over Racist Legacy
Good morning.
(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)
The name “Boalt Hall” is set to be removed today from the University of California Berkeley’s law school after a yearslong process that determined, in essence, that the school should no longer honor a man whose most notable work was rooted in racist views.
“We have to remember the racism that John Boalt expressed,” Erwin Chemerinsky, the law school’s dean, told me recently. “But that doesn’t mean we honor him by putting his name on the building.”
The move to drop a name that has been used for decades by students and alumni of one of the country’s most prestigious law schools comes as institutions around the country are grappling with what to do with schools, buildings and chair positions that are named for people whose legacies don’t stand up to modern scrutiny.
[Read more about campus controversies over historical figures.]
Mr. Chemerinsky said he became aware of Mr. Boalt’s history in mid-2017, after The San Francisco Chronicle published an opinion piece by the lawyer and Berkeley law lecturer Charles Reichmann, detailing how the law school building came to be named after Mr. Boalt.
Mr. Boalt had come to California from Nevada in 1871, as Chinese immigration was rising in the state.
In 1877, he gave a speech as the president of the Bohemian Club called “The Chinese Question,” in which he argued that non-assimilated races couldn’t live together in harmony unless one enslaved the other. But as slavery had recently become unconstitutional, he argued that the next best thing was to keep Chinese people out.
His speech and his subsequent advocacy served as major drivers of the Chinese Exclusion Act, the nation’s first law banning immigration by a specific group based solely on race or nationality.
Mr. Boalt didn’t attend the Berkeley law school, nor did he teach there. His advocacy for Chinese exclusion was, according to Mr. Reichmann, his most significant legacy.
The law school was named for him out of respect for his wife, Elizabeth Josselyn Boalt, who had contributed to the university after he died in 1901.
After Mr. Chemerinsky became the dean of the law school in July 2017, he appointed a small committee to research the issue.
The committee found that the naming of the building wasn’t a condition of Ms. Boalt’s gift; if it had been, he said, “it would be a very different situation.”
The committee’s report was distributed to the school community for feedback. Unsurprisingly, people had thoughts.
“I’d estimate I got about 800 comments,” he said, about two-thirds of whom favored the change. “I was struck by the almost unanimity of our students, faculty and alumni of color.”
In November 2018, Mr. Chemerinsky said he formally accepted the recommendation to stop using the Boalt name.
But the process wasn’t over: The campus had started its own Building Name Review Committee, which did a shorter review and solicited more campus feedback.
Finally, the change was approved by U.C. Berkeley’s chancellor, Carol Christ, and Janet Napolitano, the president of the U.C. system.
[Read a conversation with Ms. Napolitano about how the university changed its admissions process following the bribery scandal.]
All the parties involved agreed that it would be important to tell the Boalt story in some visible way going forward, and plans for that are in the works.
Still, I wondered about the future of naming buildings or schools in honor of donors, particularly in a world where more people feel empowered to come forward about misconduct by the powerful.
The only similar instance of a name being stripped from a school on a U.C. campus came after an investigation substantiated sexual harassment claims against Francisco J. Ayala, an acclaimed geneticist and significant donor at U.C. Irvine. The Ayala name was removed from the School of Biological Sciences, as well as from fellowships, scholar programs and endowed chairs.
Mr. Chemerinsky said that, while it’s important to carefully research donors, the idea of not soliciting big donations with names attached is a nonstarter.
“Higher education — public higher education — depends very much on philanthropy,” he said. “It would be naïve and unrealistic to say that we aren’t going to have named gifts.”
Michael Emerson Dirda, a spokesman for the U.C. Berkeley chancellor’s office, said that a faculty committee vets naming gifts, which require approval from the given campus’s chancellor and the university president.
“But we don’t have a crystal ball,” he said. “So it’s important to have processes in place to facilitate removing the name if it comes to that.”
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
Also: What parents need to know about the coronavirus outbreak. [The New York Times]
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.