Lesson of the Day: ‘U.S. Strike in Iraq Kills Qassim Suleimani, Commander of Iranian Forces’
Featured Article: “U.S. Strike in Iraq Kills Qassim Suleimani, Commander of Iranian Forces” (PDF excerpt) by Michael Crowley, Falih Hassan and Eric Schmitt (full digital article here)
Iran’s top security and intelligence commander was killed early Friday in a drone strike at Baghdad International Airport that was authorized by President Trump, American officials said. In this Lesson of the Day, students learn about what happened, why the president made this decision, and how the action might affect both the United States and the Middle East going forward.
The Times published an article focusing on young people in the United States and how they responded to the news in the Middle East. The article begins:
Does this description of discussions at school lunch tables with friends and at home with parents resonate with you? How did you and your friends react to the news of escalating tensions with Iran? Did you pay attention to the talk of possible war? What have you heard about this subject?
Then, before reading the featured article and answering the questions below, watch the short video above about the attack’s aftermath. What is one thing you learned? What are questions you have?
Read the featured article (PDF excerpt), then answer the following questions:
1. Who was Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani? What role did he play in Iran and the Middle East?
2. Why did President Trump order a drone strike to assassinate him? What were the factors that led to this decision?
3. How has Iran responded to the attack? What are possible actions it might take in the future to retaliate?
4. How did members of Congress react to the news? Describe the range of responses.
5. What do you predict will happen in the coming days and weeks? Do you think the situation will escalate? Or do you think tensions will ease? Why do you think the way you do?
It’s still too early to tell what the general’s killing will mean for world affairs. However, repercussions have already started to happen. Choose one or more of the following articles to read.
Iran Ends Nuclear Limits as Killing of Iranian General Upends Mideast
U.S.-Led Coalition Halts ISIS Fight as It Steels for Iranian Attacks
U.S. Allies in Mideast Fear They May Pay Price for Suleimani Killing
Iranians Close Ranks Behind Leaders After U.S. Kills Popular General
Tensions Abroad Stir a Whirlwind at Fort Bragg as Soldiers Deploy
Missile Strike Damage Appears Limited, but Iran May Not Be Done
Then answer the following questions: