Teenagers in The Times: December 2019
Here is the December edition of Teenagers in The Times, a roundup of the news and feature stories about young people that have recently appeared across sections of NYTimes.com. We publish a new edition on the first Thursday of each month.
For ideas about how to use Teenagers in The Times with your students, please see our lesson plan and special activity sheet, both of which can be used with this or any other edition.
_________
Education
Beacon High School Is Half White. That’s Why Students Walked Out.
More than 300 students at the selective public high school, one of New York City’s most prestigious, protested its admissions policies.
Teaching Teens to See Eating as Part of the Natural World
A curriculum called “Food Ed.” encourages high school students to think about the way nutrition intersects with culture, the environment and farming.
The Machines Are Learning, and So Are the Students
Artificial intelligence is starting to take over repetitive tasks in classrooms, like grading, and is optimizing coursework and revolutionizing the preparation for college entrance exams.
Takeover at Princeton’s Quadrangle
First-generation, low-income students are commandeering one of the college’s historically elitist eating clubs.
Colleges Agree to Allow Increased Competition for Applicants
An agreement between college counselors and the Justice Department should free up colleges to woo early-decision applicants with financial aid.
_________
Civics, Politics, Economics and Business
‘They’re My Safe Place’: Children of Addicted Parents, Raised by Relatives
Nearly 27,000 children in Ohio were removed from their homes last year, many because of the opioid crisis. More than a quarter were placed in the care of relatives.
As More Mothers Fill Prisons, Children Suffer ‘A Primal Wound’
At least 5 million children have had a parent behind bars. The toll is exacting, from unstable homes to lasting effects on their well-being.
Migrant Teen Lay for Hours in His Cell Before He Was Found Dead
A video shows the boy in severe distress. He was discovered by his cellmate, not immigration officials, as they originally claimed.
The Yearbook That Victims of School Shootings Never Collected
The harsh, black cover of the book, which memorializes 37 people killed at the country’s schools last year, is meant to spur action.
Greta Thunberg Is Time Person of the Year for 2019
The 16-year-old from Stockholm rose to global prominence this year with her impassioned pleas for governments to take far-reaching action to avert climate catastrophe.
Greta Thunberg Is Taking a Holiday Break. ‘You Need to Take Rest.’
The Swedish teenager who inspired a global movement is returning home, as admirers and critics weigh in.
Trump Mocks Greta Thunberg on Twitter, and She Jabs Back
Michelle Obama urged the 16-year-old climate activist to “ignore the doubters” after the president’s comments.
Young Black People Are Killing Themselves
“Young black people are making suicide attempts and dying by suicide at record high rates,” states this Opinion essay.
She’s 16 and Wants to Be President: Meet the Teenagers Planning Their Campaigns
Research shows that Generation Z is the first in which women are more likely than their male peers to be engaged in politics. Here’s what some of them told us.
National Spelling Bee Will Take Fewer ‘Wild Card’ Contestants
The spelling bee announced the changes after an eight-way tie this year. Fewer spellers who pay their own way will be accepted, and some financial aid will be available.
Killing of Barnard Student Unnerves Campus and City
First-year student was fatally stabbed during an early-evening walk in Morningside Park.
Bronx Girl Seen Kidnapped in Video Admits It Was a Hoax, Official Says
She told police she had set up the kidnapping because of her “overprotective” mother, an official said.
He Waited 6 Hours for Help at Rikers. Then He Tried to Hang Himself.
Nicholas Feliciano, 18, had a history of suicide attempts, but Rikers jail guards failed to act for seven minutes when he tried to kill himself.
McDonald’s Closes Temporarily in Peru After Death of Teens
The workers were electrocuted by a loose cable over the weekend, raising questions about labor conditions at the franchise.
_________
Science, Health, Technology and Sports
A Season on the Rez
A writer followed a Navajo high school basketball team for a season. Here is a tale from one road trip.
LeBron James Jr. Leads High School Past His Father’s Alma Mater
LeBron James Jr. hit the go-ahead shot for his California high school team against St. Vincent-St. Mary, his father’s alma mater.
Football Is Dying in Ohio. A Coach in This County Made It Thrive.
Demographics suggest football should be dying in Mercer County. Instead it’s booming and producing state champions.
Amid Blackface and Abuse Allegations, Hockey Wonders Why Young Canadians Don’t Play
A new round of racist incidents made public has forced the N.H.L. to confront its culture while the sport’s popularity — especially among diverse youth — continues to dive.
Teen Marijuana Vaping Soars, Displacing Other Habits
Drinking, cigarette smoking and the use of hard drugs all declined, according to a new federal survey of high school and middle school students.
Vaping on Campus: No Parents, No Principals, a Big Problem
Despite a growing health crisis that has killed more than 50 people, vaping has become an irresistible — and addictive — part of life for many college students.
The Beauty Myth for Boys
One of the biggest myths about the beauty myth is that it’s female. Adolescent boys suffer from unrealistic beauty standards, too.
The Crisis in Youth Suicide
Too often, suicide attempts and deaths by suicide, especially among the young, become family secrets that are not investigated and dealt with in ways that might protect others from a similar fate.
The Quiet Brain of the Athlete
The brains of fit, young athletes dial down extraneous noise and attend to important sounds better than those of other young people.
The Explosive Y.A. Novels Fans Have Been Waiting For
Tomi Adeyemi’s sequel to “Children of Blood and Bone,” the once-canceled, now revised “Blood Heir” and more books that will get readers talking.
Concussion Lawsuit Against Pop Warner Is Dismissed
Two mothers blamed the youth football organization for the deaths of their sons, who were found to have a degenerative brain disease after a fatal motorcycle crash and suicide.
How to Help a Teenager Handle the Death of an Idol
Social media lets teenagers feel truly connected to celebrities, so the death of a favorite rapper like Juice WRLD can hit them like a personal loss.
Advice for College Students Studying Abroad, and Their Parents
Students take challenges along when they spend a semester abroad and need to be prepared to take care of themselves in a new setting and a new language.
How to Communicate Better With Your Children in the New Year
Be a sportscaster. Make a glitter jar. Get a pet. Whether or not you rely on strategies like these, the central advice is to listen more.
_________
Arts, Media and Culture
Meet the Kids Who’ll Make ‘Sing Street’ Rock
One was in “Game of Thrones.” One is still in high school. They all act and play instruments. And in a new show they portray scrappy Dubliners creating a band.
Around the World in 5 Kids’ Games
Hand-clapping games are played in schoolyards everywhere, in every language. Eventually they find their way to New York City.
Palettes Are What Every Teen Wants for the Holidays
How did eye shadow become the most sought-after item on high schoolers’ wish lists?
‘Black Christmas’ Review: Horror for a New Era of Campus Debates
Sophia Takal’s film isn’t particularly scary, but it has plenty on its mind.
‘A German Youth’ Review: Lights, Camera, Guerrilla Tactics?
The documentary traces the origins of the Red Army Faction with a dizzying assemblage of archival footage.
What Do Gen Z Shoppers Want? A Cute, Cheap Outfit That Looks Great on Instagram
Three young women shoppers in three countries talk about what they buy, where they buy it and why.
The Explosive Y.A. Novels Fans Have Been Waiting For
Tomi Adeyemi’s sequel to “Children of Blood and Bone,” the once-canceled, now revised “Blood Heir” and more books that will get readers talking.
A Comedy Special for Kids That Gets Their Dark Sense of Humor
“John Mulaney & the Sack Lunch Bunch” on Netflix doesn’t condescend to his 8- to 13-year-old co-stars or the youngsters it’s aimed at.
_________