Making Sure Our Antibiotics Remain Potent
To the Editor:
Re “Lifelines at Risk as Bankruptcies Stall Antibiotics” (“Deadly Germs, Lost Cures,” front page, Dec. 26):
Your article about the antibiotic crisis offers an alarming forecast of what could happen to the entire drug industry if arbitrary price controls preclude the possibility of profits sufficient to compensate for the cost, time and risk of drug development.
As for antibiotics, the problem is simple, and the solution is straightforward. Because they are used infrequently and intermittently, new antibiotics cannot earn back their capital costs unless they are very expensive, which is impractical and unacceptable in today’s environment.
The solution is to treat antibiotics as a public good. If the government funds antibiotic research and development, companies will be able to set modest prices and make a fair profit.
Jay Markowitz
Wilson, Wyo.
The writer, a former transplant surgeon, is a senior vice president at Regeneron, a biotechnology company. His views are his own.
To the Editor:
As I see it, the basic problem here is the greed of Novartis and other pharmaceutical giants. Your article informs us that “in the 1980s, there were 18 major pharmaceutical companies developing new antibiotics; today there are three.” It also tells us that the former developers need to be lured back.
Since these companies have always claimed that their main interest is saving lives, there should be no need to lure them back. They should recognize their responsibility. Unlike the small start-ups, the big companies are not financially vulnerable. They just have to recognize an obvious truth: They can use some of the profits from their moneymaking drugs to subsidize other drugs that are desperately needed.
And if they won’t do this on their own, the government should be prepared to force them to do it.
Richard Nochimson
Bronx
To the Editor:
Your article rightly points out that the arsenal to fight drug-resistant bugs is waning as companies have stopped investing in new drugs.
Both the United Nations General Assembly and the World Health Organization have adopted resolutions and issued reports on the threat that antimicrobial resistance poses to world health. Until new drugs are developed, it is imperative that the world health community reduce the overuse of antibiotics. Toward this end, rapid and affordable diagnostics are needed to distinguish viral from bacterial infections so antibiotics are appropriately prescribed.
Regrettably, development of these diagnostics continues to be underfunded, contributing to the further increase in antimicrobial resistance.
Mark Kessel
Geneva
The writer is chairman of the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics.
To the Editor:
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria are a growing and deadly threat. While developing new drugs is part of the solution, we must also preserve the effectiveness of existing antibiotics by stopping their overuse. Unfortunately, recent data suggests that we’re failing to do that.
It’s concerning that approximately two-thirds of our lifesaving antibiotics sold in the United States go to meat production — where they’re often used to compensate for industrial farming conditions. In 2018, despite growing alarm over antibiotic resistance, beef and pork producers bought even more antibiotics considered important to human medicine than they did in 2017.
Due in part to consumer pressure on fast food chains, chicken producers are drastically reducing their antibiotic use. One estimate showed that 92 percent of broiler chickens in 2018 were raised without the routine use of medically important antibiotics. Beef and pork producers should follow that lead.
While we race to develop new drugs, it’s critical not to forget that antibiotics are first and foremost lifesaving medicines. They are not tools to produce slightly cheaper meat.
Curtis Morris
Portland, Me.
The writer is a campaign associate at U.S. PIRG, a federation of American nonprofits.
To the Editor:
Re “‘Little Women’ for a New Era” (Arts pages, Jan. 8):
I was delighted that you included the fact that Louisa May Alcott was “the first woman to register to vote in Concord, Mass., in 1879.”
The following year, on March 29, Alcott and 19 other women voted.
“No bolts fell on our audacious heads,” Alcott wrote in her journal. “No earthquake shook the town.”
Penny Colman
Englewood, N.J.
The writer is the author of “The Vote: Women’s Fierce Fight.”