Day in Impeachment: Key Moments From the Managers’ Opening Arguments
After a day of outlining the substance of the case against President Trump, the lead House impeachment manager returned in the evening session to lobbying the Senate for testimony and documents from the Trump administration, which so far has refused to provide them.
Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California and head of the team of House managers, took the microphone for a second time after the dinner break and this time turned the question back on the Senate, challenging it to demand that the president provide the information he has until now blocked.
As he mentioned various moments in the effort by Mr. Trump and his team to pressure Ukraine to investigate his Democratic rivals, Mr. Schiff repeatedly stopped and pointed out that if the senators wanted to know more about what happened at that point, they could seek documents or witnesses who could provide more information.
“Would you like to see that written record?” Mr. Schiff said at one point about a key telephone call. “Well,” he added, “there’s a good way to find out what happened on that call because it’s in writing. Is there any question why they’re withholding this from Congress? Is there any question about that?”
The argument revived the pleas the managers made on Tuesday to no effect, as Republican senators rejected motions to call witnesses and seek documents at this time. The trial rules set by the Republican majority will allow the managers to make motions for witnesses and records after opening arguments and a question-and-answer session with senators.
The White House team, which had no speaking opportunity on the floor on Wednesday, has dismissed the managers’ demands for testimony and records, saying that it would violate traditional presidential confidentiality critical to a president’s ability to do his job and that if such information was so important to their case they should have gone to court to litigate the matter.
House managers began laying out their case for convicting and removing Mr. Trump from office, accusing him of a corrupt scheme to enlist the help of a foreign government to tarnish his domestic political rivals and pave his way to a second term.
In a series of sober, methodical speeches, the Democratic managers, or prosecutors, presented extracts of testimony that they were able to gather during the House inquiry despite the president’s refusal to cooperate to argue that Mr. Trump’s pressure on Ukraine to incriminate Democrats amounted to an assault on America’s constitutional democracy.
“President Trump solicited foreign interference in our democratic elections, abusing the power of his office to seek help from abroad to improve his re-election prospects at home,” Mr. Schiff said from the well of the Senate. “President Trump,” he added, “withheld hundreds of millions of dollars in military aid to a strategic partner at war with Russia to secure foreign help with his re-election. In other words, to cheat.”
While the Senate has so far refused to allow witnesses, Mr. Schiff and his fellow managers in effect brought a few to the floor anyway by playing video clips from current and former officials like Fiona Hill, Gordon D. Sondland, William B. Taylor Jr. and David Holmes, who testified before Mr. Schiff’s House Intelligence Committee last year. And they played several from Mr. Trump himself, showing the president in 2016 publicly calling on Russia to hack Hillary Clinton’s email and last year publicly calling on Ukraine and even China to investigate former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
“Shocking video,” Representative Sylvia Garcia, Democrat of Texas, said after showing Mr. Trump telling George Stephanopoulos of ABC News last spring that he would still be willing to accept damaging information about a campaign opponent from Russia or another foreign government.
With three days to make their case, the seven House impeachment managers started outlining the events in narrative form, how the president and his associates sought to pressure Ukraine to announce investigations of Mr. Biden and Democrats while withholding $391 million in American aid. The managers will later explore the constitutional ramifications of the case.
Mr. Schiff was followed by Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York. Next came Ms. Garcia, then Representatives Jason Crow of Colorado, Val Demings of Florida and Hakeem Jeffries of New York. Mr. Schiff returned to the microphone after dinner, before handing off to Representative Zoe Lofgren of California, then returned to finish the day. Mr. Schiff was by far the main face of the effort, speaking for more than four hours compared with three hours for all six of his colleagues combined.
“If not remedied by his conviction in the Senate and removal from office,” Mr. Schiff said, “President Trump’s abuse of his office and obstruction of Congress will permanently alter the balance of power among the branches of government, inviting future presidents to operate as if they are also beyond the reach of accountability, congressional oversight and the law.”
Mr. Schiff went on to reject the notion that impeachment is outdated and therefore no longer a viable instrument to hold a president accountable. “If it is a relic,” he said, “I wonder how much longer our republic can succeed.”
The defendant was not in the room or even in the country, but he made his views known. Mr. Trump fired off so many Twitter messages as his fate was being debated on the Senate floor that he set a record for any single day in his presidency.
As of 7:30 p.m., he had posted or reposted 142 messages on Twitter, surpassing the previous record of 123 set in December, as he defended himself and lashed out at the House managers. Most of the messages were retweets of messages from allies and supporters assailing Mr. Schiff and others prosecuting the case.
Mr. Trump reposted a tweet from Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, who wrote: “The more we hear from Adam Schiff, the more the GOP is getting unified against this partisan charade!” Mr. Trump added: “True!” He also reposted a tweet from Mr. Paul in which the senator invited the president to attend the trial as his guest.
Mr. Trump began his Twitter blitz around midnight Washington time while still in Davos, Switzerland, where he attended an economic forum. He fired off 41 tweets over the next hour, or one every 88 seconds, according to Bill Frischling of Factba.se, a service that compiles and analyzes data on Mr. Trump’s presidency.
Some of the messages later in the day came even as he flew on Air Force One back toward Washington and amplified the broadsides he delivered at a news conference before leaving Davos, where he called Mr. Nadler a “sleaze bag” and Mr. Schiff a “con job” and a “corrupt politician.”
Mr. Trump told reporters at the news conference that he would love to attend the trial — something that no other president has done and that his lawyers have advised against — so he could “sit right in the front row and stare into their corrupt faces.”
He praised his lawyers for their performance on Tuesday. “We’re doing very well,” he said. “I got to watch enough. I thought our team did a very good job. But honestly, we have all the material. They don’t have the material.”
The last comment about the material immediately provoked criticism from Democrats, who called it a boast about the president’s success at withholding documents and evidence from Congress. But it was unclear from the context whether he was instead saying, however inartfully, that his side had the stronger argument.
Senate Democrats ruled out any bargain that would involve calling Hunter Biden, the son of the former vice president, as a witness in the trial in exchange for Republicans agreeing to hear testimony from John R. Bolton, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser.
“That trade is not on the table,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, told reporters during a break in the trial.
Hunter Biden served on the board of a Ukrainian energy company while his father was vice president. In a July phone call, Mr. Trump asked the president of Ukraine to do him “a favor” and investigate both Bidens, a request that is now at the heart of the impeachment charges.
The former vice president’s many allies in the Senate have been particularly insistent on the point. “The president is on trial here, not anyone with the last name Biden,” Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware and a close ally of the elder Mr. Biden, said in a tweet Tuesday night. “VP Biden and Hunter Biden are not relevant witnesses.”
Joseph Biden himself also ruled out any testimony tradeoff, saying of the president, “I’m not going to play his game.”
“Look what Trump has done his whole career, whenever he’s in trouble,” Mr. Biden said during a campaign stop in Osage, Iowa. “He tries to blame somebody else, divert the attention.”
He added: “This is a constitutional issue. We’re not going to turn it into a farce, into some kind of political theater.”
While Mr. Trump used his telephone to make his views known, the next three days may prove uncomfortable for his lawyers and Republican allies stuck on the Senate floor as the House Democrats have exclusive access to the microphone.
Unlike the procedural arguments on Tuesday in which both sides went back and forth offering their points, the trial rules now provide the House managers with 24 hours over three days to make their case uninterrupted by the other side or any of the senators.
For hour after hour, the president’s lawyers and their Republican allies are being forced to sit silent in their seats, listening to the most nefarious interpretations of Mr. Trump’s actions without any ability to rebut the points except during breaks in front of television cameras in the hallways.
But it may also be the first time that some senators have heard the totality of the evidence presented in a sustained way. Always on the move, constantly running from one meeting to another, senators almost never have hours on end, much less three days straight, to focus on a single subject. Few if any of them are likely to have watched all of the House hearings that led to the impeachment.
The White House team will get its turn, though, and the House managers will be the ones having to sit quiet as the president’s lawyers present their case uninterrupted and unrebutted.
The White House passed up a chance to force a vote to dismiss the impeachment charges against Mr. Trump before arguments get underway.
Both the president’s defense lawyers and the House Democratic impeachment managers had until 9 a.m. to offer motions related to the trial, except for ones that would call for witnesses and new evidence, issues that will be dealt with next week. Neither side did so.
The White House’s silence was more significant. Although Republican leaders have discouraged the president’s team from seeking a swift dismissal, Mr. Trump had endorsed the idea and his conservative allies said the Senate ought to vote promptly to do so. A dismissal vote this week would almost certainly have failed to attract a majority of senators, dividing Republicans and dealing Mr. Trump an early symbolic defeat.
— Nicholas Fandos
On Tuesday, House managers repeatedly criticized the Republican senators who will decide Mr. Trump’s fate, with one manager accusing them of “treacherous” behavior. By Wednesday, it was clear that the tone did not go over very well.
Republicans laced into Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, whose aggressive tone toward senators — and accusation of treachery — during his remarks after midnight were too much for some in the chamber.
“What Chairman Nadler said and how he conducted himself was outrageous and an insult to the Senate,” said Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas. “We don’t need to continue the clown circus that started over in the House.”
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, lashed out at the managers for suggesting that Republican senators were part of a cover-up by not voting in support of subpoenaing additional documents and witnesses. “You can say what you want about me but I’m covering up nothing,” Mr. Graham told reporters.
Even some Democrats offered some mild criticism. Senator Jon Tester of Montana told reporters that Mr. Nadler “could have chosen better words” and Mr. Coons told CNN that “frankly, several of those folks who were making arguments in the chamber took an aggressive tone. The tone in the Senate has always been and tries to remain measured and civil.”
All of which may explain why Mr. Schiff opened Wednesday’s presentation with an olive branch to the senators, heaping praise on them for their forbearance. “I want to begin today by thanking you for the conduct of the proceedings yesterday,” he told the senators. “And for inviting your patience as we go forward.”
— Michael D. Shear