Benetton Severs Ties With Oliviero Toscani
For decades, the photographer Oliviero Toscani helped make Benetton clothing a huge name. He did it with so-called shockvertising: provocative, socially progressive ads that spurred outrage and drew headlines, whether they involved an AIDS patient on his deathbed, Mafia vendettas, horses copulating or two actors depicting a priest and a nun kissing.
But on Thursday, Benetton decided that Mr. Toscani, who had returned in 2017 as the creative director after a hiatus in the early 2000s, had gone too far.
The company fired Mr. Toscani, 77, over comments he made about the 2018 collapse of the Morandi Bridge in Genoa, Italy, that killed 43 people.
The company and its chairman, Luciano Benetton, “completely disassociates itself from Mr. Toscani’s remarks,” the brand said in statement, while “renewing their sincere closeness to the families of the victims and to all those who have been involved in this terrible tragedy.”
Benetton is the principal shareholder in Atlantia, the holding company that controls Autostrade per l’Italia, or Highways for Italy, which managed the bridge as well as more than half of Italy’s 4,000 miles of toll roads.
During a radio interview earlier this week, Mr. Toscani said, “Who cares that a bridge collapsed?” He was explaining why Fabrica, Benetton’s creative studio in the Veneto, should not be conflated with Autostrade. “Enough already.”
The radio’s host quickly intervened, noting: “The people who died, for example, cared.” Mr. Toscani added, “This story doesn’t interest me.”
Two days later, an unusually contrite Mr. Toscani said on Twitter that his comments had been taken out of context. In an interview on another radio program he said that he was “destroyed and truly sorry.”
That did little to quell the anger at the photographer from families of the victims, lawmakers of all political stripes and many other Italians.
“Forty-three innocent victims may have counted little for him, but for us they were everything,” Egle Possetti, the president of a committee commemorating the Morandi Bridge victims, told the news agency ANSA this week.
The hashtag #ANointeressa, or #Wecare, hit social media along with calls to boycott Benetton.
Soon afterward, the Benetton Group issued the statement, acknowledging “the impossibility of continuing the professional relationship with its creative director.”
The Benetton family had come under fire after the bridge collapsed on Aug. 14, 2018, for what was perceived as indifference to the tragedy: They waited two days and then responded through Edizione, the family holding company, with a statement expressing “deep sympathy” for the victims.
Gilberto Benetton, one of the founders of the company, said in one of his last interviews — he died in October 2018 — that the silence had been a sign of respect.
But the absence of immediate response was seen as a rare misstep by the media-savvy family, and may have prompted Mr. Toscani’s abrupt dismissal Thursday.
For much of the 1980s and 1990s, Mr. Toscani’s shock-and-thought-provoking ads helped turn the small family company into an international powerhouse with thousands of stores throughout the world. He was not worried about pushing the envelope.
“Creativity is not based on security,” Mr. Toscani said in a 1995 interview with The New York Times. “Once you’re secure, you’re doing something that’s already been done.”
But even as the company broke barriers, by using images of racially diverse couples and gay families, Mr. Toscani’s ads frequently crossed lines. He left the company in 2000 after an ad campaign with photographs of American inmates on death row caused an uproar, especially in the United States.
He returned as art director of Benetton in 2017 and lost no time regaining notoriety after the company repurposed two photographs from 2018 migrant rescue operations by the Franco-German charity SOS Méditerranée for an advertising campaign.
Coming at a time when migration had become a contentious topic throughout Europe, the ad campaign drew protests and criticism that Benetton was insensitive to the thousands of migrants who drown each year during the perilous Mediterranean crossing.
Though Mr. Toscani courted controversy for years, in the end he appeared to have been ousted not for one of his provocative campaigns but because of a spontaneous remark. One made at a time when fashion brands are increasingly being called out on social media for perceived bad behavior, and many consumers are no longer willing to tolerate what they see as insensitivity.  
The #Wecare campaign had been spearheaded by Giovanni Toti, the president of the Liguria Region, of which Genoa is the capital, who had been outraged by Mr. Toscani’s “obscene words.”
“We did it because families of the 43 victims deserve respect and justice,” he wrote in a statement issued Thursday evening.