P.G.A. and D.G.A. Nominations Favor ‘Parasite,’ ‘1917,’ ‘The Irishman’
The Oscar nominations will be announced Jan. 13, but the week leading up to them is crammed with last-minute awards-season developments, including the Golden Globes ceremony and, on Tuesday, nominations from the all-important Producers Guild and Directors Guild.
“1917”
“Ford v Ferrari”
“The Irishman”
“Jojo Rabbit”
“Joker”
“Knives Out”
“Little Women”
“Marriage Story”
“Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”
“Parasite”
The Producers Guild of America field is considered one of the strongest predictors of Oscar success: Last year, every single best-picture nominee was recognized by this group first. So, what can we make of the new crop of 10 nominees?
Well, this list continues to bring good news for the handful of films that have so far dominated the season, including Quentin Tarantino’s “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”; Martin Scorsese’s “The Irishman”; the South Korean sensation “Parasite”; Noah Baumbach’s divorce dramedy, “Marriage Story”; the gritty comic-book film “Joker”; and the Golden Globe-winning war drama, “1917.”
The producers often favor critically acclaimed box-office successes, and this year included the original mystery “Knives Out” and the racing drama “Ford v Ferrari” among those ranks. The group’s citations are rounded out by Taika Waititi’s World War II satire “Jojo Rabbit” and Greta Gerwig’s “Little Women,” a box-office hit that needed a nod like this after missing out on some important Oscar-season bellwethers.
Among the notable contenders left off the producers’ list were “Bombshell,” “The Farewell” and “The Two Popes.”
Go here for the full list of the producers’ nominees, including animated titles and TV contenders.
Bong Joon Ho, “Parasite”
Sam Mendes, “1917”
Martin Scorsese, “The Irishman”
Quentin Tarantino, “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”
Taika Waititi, “Jojo Rabbit”
The Directors Guild continued to advance “Parasite’s” Bong Joon Ho, who was nominated alongside Scorsese, Tarantino, and the winner of the Golden Globe for best director, Sam Mendes. The fifth slot, in a bit of a surprise, went to Taika Waititi.
There are usually one or two discrepancies between the D.G.A. list and the eventual group of Oscar nominees for best director, which could provide some comfort for the high-profile contenders snubbed by the Guild, including Todd Phillips for “Joker” and Noah Baumbach for “Marriage Story.”
The exclusion of the “Little Women” filmmaker Greta Gerwig, who was nominated for a DGA Award in 2018 for “Lady Bird,” means this is the eighth of the last 10 Directors Guild lineups to be made up solely of men.
Go here for the full list of the directors’ nominees.