3 … 2 … 1. Then Their Real Countdown Began.
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
Ringing in the New Year in Times Square is an experience like no other. So is the job of photographing it. Virtually every year since 1998, The Times has published a picture of the midnight celebration on the next morning’s front page. After this year’s event, the Times staffers Brittainy Newman and Calla Kessler recounted the precision and pluck involved in capturing the images you saw.
10. THEIR TASK WAS A JUGGLING ACT. For starters, Ms. Newman and Ms. Kessler, who had never shot the event before, had to navigate their way amid the hordes of people and find positions from which to shoot within about a three-block strip of space that fills completely as the night goes on. As for the photos, they needed to embody the euphoria of the moment but also feature “layers” that included the setting for context. And at midnight, there were only minutes to shoot — and transmit — the pictures.
9. SCOUTING WAS A KEY. The photographers arrived at Times Square around 7 p.m. The area they had access to was crowded but manageable. “Around between 7 and 9, it’s actually pretty quiet,” Ms. Newman said. Both photographers used the time to do laps around the area, looking for positions and particularly festive people to feature in the midnight shot, and also in photos for their 9 p.m. deadline to make the first city edition.
8. TALKING TO PEOPLE WAS CRITICAL. Both photographers stressed the importance of engaging people in the crowd when possible, listening to personal stories. That made Ms. Newman and Ms. Kessler less conspicuous and more likely to get intimate, candid shots, instead of people posing and holding up peace signs. Also, both wanted to show a diversity of merrymakers.
7. AFTER 10:30, THEY STAYED PUT. As security became heightened and space became crammed, they decided on their spots for midnight. “You couldn’t move anymore, literally,” Ms. Newman said. At 11:40, Ms. Kessler looked down at her phone and thought, “It’s go time.”
6. MIDNIGHT WAS NERVE-RACKING. “The energy is just so crazy,” Ms. Newman said. She looked to shoot a couple she had seen “getting kind of mushy.” But people were still moving, and moving her, too. The couple was taller than she was, so she stood on her tiptoes, raised her camera up high and shot. And shot. “Probably 50 frames in three minutes,” she said.
5. THEY HAD TO IMPROVISE. Earlier, Ms. Kessler had found members of the military and thought about the possibility of an updated version of Alfred Eisenstaedt’s iconic photo at the end of World War II. But she couldn’t get the angle she needed. Instead, still inspired by that photo, and with diversity in mind, she shot a same-sex couple, Julian Sanders and Jay Morales of San Francisco.
4. AFTER THE COUNTDOWN, A SECOND COUNTDOWN BEGAN. The photographers stopped shooting around 12:03, then needed to dart to an open spot. They had to upload their images from their cameras to their laptops, then transmit them to Times editors. But they needed distance from the crowd for their portable Wi-Fi signal to work. Their deadline: 12:08.
3. THEY HAD TO BE PUSHY. After much nudging and jostling, Ms. Newman made it to a stoop on 44th Street and sent her selections. Ms. Kessler, confetti raining on her laptop, couldn’t transmit from a spot on the sidewalk on 44th Street. She began pushing her way through the crowd, trying to send the first set of her images while holding her laptop above her head. Her heart was racing, but the photos went through. “I don’t know how I ended up making it,” she said.
2. THE YEAR’S FIRST FRONT PAGE WAS A MILESTONE. Ms. Newman’s photo of the couple she shot was published online. Ms. Kessler’s photo of Mr. Sanders and Mr. Morales was chosen for the front page and is believed to be the first Times “A1” page for New Year’s that featured a same-sex couple kissing.
1. THEY DIDN’T PARTY AFTERWARD. Ms. Kessler, who was fighting a cold, went home, though she wasn’t able to fall asleep until around 4 a.m. About that time, Ms. Newman was on her way to the airport. She had to catch a 5:30 a.m. flight to Iowa for her next assignment, shooting Joe Biden’s campaign.