‘A Woman Like Her: The Story Behind the Honor Killing of a Social Media Star,’ by Sanam Maher: An Excerpt
It takes a little over two hours to drive from Multan, a city in southern Punjab, to the village of Shah Sadar Din. After many checkpoints, where officers shake down the young men on motorbikes, some riding two or three at a time, their thin arms curled around each other’s waists, you’ll see a silty brown river snaking past men lounging on charpoys by its banks. On the way, if you admire the fields of sugarcane, each stalk taller than a man, your driver, a local who has played under the green sway of these plants as a child, will scoff. The ganna is short this year because there has been little water. He has seen these plants soar to fifteen feet. On the side of the road men and women stand by smoking steel vats, stirring a muddy treacle, folding crushed almonds and dried fruit into the soupy folds of the molasses. They sell packets of this liquid sugar along the highway.
You’ll drive past a thicket of short, squat mango trees, sufaidas (eucalyptus) that are chopped for firewood, and date trees that in five or six months will yield bundles of silky-skinned fruit the size of a baby. The grass here is the brightest malachite. It is impossible to know where the sky ends and the azure, cloud-filled pools of water in the fields begin.
A thermal power station with lazy puffs of smoke curling from its cooling towers powers the entire region. Great swoops of cable arc from one pylon to the next, each tower a child’s line drawing of a robot standing astride our puny world. Within an hour of leaving Multan, you will reach the Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Housing Complex and its accompanying hospital, donated to the people here by the Turkish government after their homes were washed away during the floods of 2010. In the distance smoke plumes from brick kilns, where men, women, and children spend their entire lives on their knees under the sun, cooling, patting, stacking, and packing red bricks that are sent across the country. They will never leave this burning land, always thousands of rupees short of freeing themselves from their debts to the kilns’ owners.
[ Return to the review of “A Woman Like Her.” ]
Beyond the kilns, white canopies hover inches above the ground, protecting a swathe of GM crops. You’ll pass warehouses, built better than most homes here, filled with the government’s wheat reserves. And then you’ll see the blaze of the mustard fields. If you have spent your life in a city, you will struggle to remember seeing a yellow so bright, a yellow like the neon gleam of a McDonald’s sign in the night, like a New York taxi washed clean by the rain. After this, you arrive in the city of Dera Ghazi Khan and it will feel as though that mustard field is the last thing of beauty you will see for some time.
You will abruptly realise that no women feature in any of the advertisements on the billboards. It is the first time you have seen only men in ads for washing powder. You’ll see women on the streets, but never their faces. Many of them wear what looks like a black ski mask with slits for their eyes under their hijab. The others wear a burqa that makes you feel naked under your dupatta. The burqa’s fabric falls from a skullcap fitted to the woman’s head. A thin funnel rises from this cap. The burqa has no slits for the eyes. The funnel allows air into the burqa so the women do not suffocate. If you have ever been caught in a dust storm, you’ll understand how these women see the world. When you stare at them, your contact in Dera Ghazi Khan, a journalist, tells you about a place not too far from here where the tribal belt of Balochistan province starts, where he says the women are not given any shoes. When you don’t understand, he explains impatiently, “If you’re not wearing shoes and you walk outside, where will your eyes remain? You’ll never look up—never look at any man—if you’re scared of where your naked foot might fall when you leave your home.”
Less than an hour away from Dera Ghazi Khan, you speed past fish farms and a smashed tractor—five people dead, and no ambulance for miles—then pass a board that welcomes you to the village of Shah Sadar Din. Qandeel Baloch was born here.
In July 2016, the villagers watched as reporters from all over—not just from Pakistan, but from abroad, from the BBC, the Guardian, the New York Times—turned up in Shah Sadar Din to cover the story of Qandeel Baloch. It was a great time to be a local reporter. If you weren’t covering the story, you were working as a fixer, an interpreter, a driver . . . the possibilities were endless. The local journalists took the visiting reporters to Shah Sadar Din over and over again. Everyone wanted to see where Qandeel came from. The villagers couldn’t understand it. “My friend, you have come here for nothing,” a man said to one of the reporters. “Strange people, coming here just like that.” What did he mean? the reporter asked. “We have a tradition here that every second or fourth day some girl is killed and thrown in the river. You media guys are creating hype for nothing.” A girl could be stuffed into a gunny sack or the kind of bag used to carry wheat or sugarcane and the bag could be filled with stones. The bag would sink to the bottom of the river. The girl would stay there, buried under the stones.
***
When I meet Qandeel’s parents, three months have passed since the day she died. Any meeting with them must now be organized through a man named Safdar Shah, who introduces himself over the phone as their lawyer. A few days earlier, Qandeel’s parents had told a reporter they have been forced to beg for food in Shah Sadar Din, where they returned after they were evicted from their house in Multan. While their daughter was alive, they divided their time between Shah Sadar Din and Multan, and Qandeel paid the 10,000 rupees’ rent for this house every month. Without her, they could not afford the rent. But Shah says the meeting will take place at the house in Multan, where Qandeel was murdered, and not in Shah Sadar Din. “It’s no problem at all,” he says airily. “Just don’t come to the village. People here aren’t happy about all the reporters who have been coming to meet the parents.”
It takes around twenty-five minutes to travel from Multan’s city center to Qandeel’s home. We pass through the cantonment area and drive past the army club with its fat white onion domes and buildings whose walls bear neat lines of portraits of young men.
Further on, as the road narrows and deteriorates, there are fewer women. Men crowd the vegetable carts and fruit stands and linger at shops selling household supplies, shoes and clothes. There are signs indicating a textile mill. Dung cakes slapped on the low red-brick walls of houses grow warm in the November sunlight. As we near the Karachi Hotel neighbourhood, the buildings thin out. The area is home to many who have come to the city from villages across Punjab seeking work. Small houses, narrow, one or two storeys high, constructed by land- owners who rent them out for five to ten thousand rupees a month, are squeezed together on patches of land.
[ Return to the review of “A Woman Like Her.” ]
Someone is building a house just a few steps from the one that Qandeel rented for her parents. The scrub has been cleared, and the foundations reveal a simple, cramped layout: a kitchen, two rooms and what will probably be a bathroom. It is quiet, with the houses at some distance from the road. There are no squalling cars, no shrieking children playing in the street, no shops around the corner, no gurgle of water in open gutters. It does not have the familiar smells: there is no scent of sewage, no waft of food simmering on a stove, no piles of chicken fat, vegetable skins or cores of fruit festering in heaps on the side of the street. It seems to be deserted.
Safdar Shah’s white car stands at the end of the lane, just before the sharp right turn to Qandeel’s house. Shah waits at the door to Qandeel’s house. He wears a starched black shalwar kameez that puffs around him and rustles when he moves. His shoes have been scrubbed to a dull glow down to their pointed tips. He probably slicked down his hair this morning, but it has buffeted into wispy clouds. His light skin is flushed pink in the heat and his moustache is a jet black straight from a bottle. He looks like the kind of man who, if you ask him his age, will coyly reply, “How old do you think I am?”
“I know more about her than they could ever tell you,” he says right away, as though picking up the thread of our earlier conversation on the phone. “Did I tell you I am a Syed? [A Syed is a Muslim who claims to be descended from the Prophet Muhammad’s family.] We don’t lie, you see.”
Inside, Qandeel’s father, eighty-year-old Muhammad Azeem, perches on a black imitation-leather sofa, his legs, stick-thin within the loose folds of a dhoti, pulled close to his chest. He absently strokes the puckered nub of flesh where one leg abruptly ends. He lost his foot six months ago when a car ran over it. “The daughter came here to have his leg fixed,” Shah explains. “She came to Multan on the second day of Eid and she planned to get his treatment done and then fly back to Karachi. She said she was going to leave for India after that.”
Qandeel’s mother, Anwar bibi, looks like she is in her fifties. She is small, the hard rise of her collarbones under her kameez hinting at a thin frame. She sits on the edge of one of the two charpoys in the room. Her feet dangle inches above the floor.
I try to gauge Shah’s relationship with Qandeel’s parents but it’s not clear how he helps them or what he does as their lawyer since they are represented by the district prosecutor in their daughter’s murder case. “I go everywhere with them,” he explains as he sits on the charpoy next to Anwar bibi. “I mean, they refuse to go anywhere without me.”
Azeem is quiet. Shah continues, “He told me, ‘Safdar, promise me you won’t leave me!’ So I swore, ‘As long as I am alive, I’ll never leave your side.’”
Both Azeem and Anwar bibi only stare at the television as Shah makes these statements. They watched their daughter on that screen in a handful of television dramas and morning show appearances. She would call them to let them know what channel and what time she would be on. “In those moments, while we were waiting to see Qandeel, life would feel great,” Azeem says. As a child, she had told them she wanted to be a star. And now that she was singing, dancing and acting, they were happy for her.
Shah sighs. “She didn’t talk to them for years. Didn’t talk to the father for three years.”
“I supported her,” Azeem pipes up. “I used to send her money.” Shah continues as if he hasn’t heard him, “Didn’t talk to the mother for six years.”
“She would call us sometimes,” Anwar bibi says quietly. “Oh she just ended all relations with them,” Shah says. “She thought they wouldn’t like what she was doing. She said she would never look back.”
By June 2016 they were alarmed. Their daughter’s face and voice seemed to be on TV almost every week. These were not appearances that she called to tell them about. “We saw these photos on the news,” Anwar bibi says. “They said Qandeel did an interview with a cleric. There were photographs of her sitting on his lap. Wearing his cap. Every day those pictures were shown on every channel. Over and over again.” While Anwar bibi and Azeem were in Multan for a visit, they found out that some people were taking photos of their home in Shah Sadar Din.
“These kameenay [bastard] mullahs,” sputters Azeem. “Those bearded men,” Shah suggests. “Those bloody bearded ones!” Azeem continues. “They asked people, ‘Who is Qandeel? Where is she from? What do you know about her?’” Qandeel was worried. “Don’t think badly of me,” she told her father. “I haven’t done anything wrong. I’m just fighting with someone.”
Anwar bibi scolded her daughter. She didn’t want her to do any interviews or talk about the cleric. “These people are bigger than you,” she remembers saying. “Don’t meet these people who are above your stature,” she cautioned. Remember where you come from. Whose daughter you are.
“These media people hounded her,” Anwar bibi says. “They just wouldn’t stop. Hounded her beyond all limits.”
“The media got her killed,” Shah says with a sigh. “She just wanted to be famous. She wanted to make a name for herself. She wanted people to know that Qandeel exists. I once asked her, and we used to speak practically every day you know, if she knew why people spoke badly of her. They are jealous of you, I told Qandeel. They are jealous of your fame.”
With Shah deftly steering the conversation, Anwar bibi and Azeem’s explanation for why their son, Waseem, killed Qandeel comes out as a muddled version of the story that has been told, retold and then untold over the last few months. A month before we meet, Anwar bibi and Azeem were interviewed on a talk show about their daughter. They said that Qandeel was scared of her brothers and feared their reaction to the kind of work that she was doing. Azeem told a reporter that his daughter had confided in him about this, saying, “Baba, sometimes I feel my younger brother wants to kill me.”
Today, they speak proudly of their daughter to me. They insist on calling her “Qandeel,” the name she chose for herself, and not “Fouzia,” the name they gave her. She is a shehnshah (a queen), the one whose name will always be remembered, the one who became famous, a brave-hearted girl who was a tomboy and loved to swim, ride bikes, run six miles at a time, and do karate. She was intelligent, far more than their other children, bringing home prizes for her work in school and becoming class monitor. She danced at the slightest hint of a tune. She was not naughty but knew how to stand up for herself. She beat up a man who teased her sister but was not cut out for hard work like harvesting, milking cows, cleaning, and cooking like the other women in the village. When she came to Multan for ten days at a time, she liked to sleep for much of the day. She liked to be fashionable. She loved children and spoiled them. She cried for her son when she lost custody of him.
“And now that she is gone, you must think of that child,” Shah interrupts.
“Don’t say things like that,” Anwar bibi replies.
“I don’t want that child,” Azeem says, scowling. “You need to get that child somehow,” Shah tells them. “He is her nishaani [memory].”
A few weeks after she died, Qandeel’s landlord in Karachi sent her parents a notice to collect her things and pay a few months of outstanding rent. The letter had the address of her apartment, and her parents finally found out where she had been living in Karachi. Azeem and Anwar bibi travelled there with Safdar Shah. “This sofa you’re sitting on?” Shah says, pointing. “Qandeel’s. That table. Qandeel’s. Want to see the rest?” Her clothes, wispy silk shirts, jeans and soft chiffon tunics, fill a steel cupboard in one room. In another—the room where Anwar bibi says she walked in that morning in July to find her daughter unresponsive, a cloth thrown over her face—a bright red and yellow suitcase lies on the floor, more clothes bursting out of it.
Shah looks around the room. “Do you know what we can do with all these things?” he asks.
“These clothes, these shoes—they’re of no use to these people. Where we live, no one wears these kinds of things. Do you think people would buy this stuff?”
In a corner, the top of a small fridge is covered with a smattering of junk: Mr White Smokers Toothpaste, with the end cut off to squeeze every last bit of paste from the tube, a small bottle of mustard oil, a scrubbing brush for nails, Comfort Morning Fresh fabric softener, a yoghurt and cucumber face wash for oily skin, a card for a twenty-four-hour taxi service in Karachi, a toothbrush, and what looks like a bar of pure gold. Shah’s eye falls on this and he picks it up to examine it. He shakes it. It is a powder compact, its red and black embossed YSL logo slightly chipped. It is almost empty, with just a ground-down shimmering square of flesh-coloured dust.
Shah grins. “Here you go,” he says, thrusting the compact into my hand. “Something for you to remember her by. Take it. It’ll be Qandeel ki nishaani (a memory of Qandeel).”
[ Return to the review of “A Woman Like Her.” ]