Hooking the Reader Right From the Start: The Times Trilobites Column
Our new Mentor Text series spotlights writing from The Times that students can learn from and emulate.
This entry aims to help support those participating in our STEM-writing contest, in which students are invited to choose an issue or question in science, technology, engineering, math or health that interests them, then write a 500-word explanation that will engage and enlighten readers.
For even more on how to help your students write interesting, clear and meaningful informational pieces, please see our related writing unit.
You probably already know that if you’re writing a narrative your opening paragraph needs to pull your reader into the story — perhaps dropping them into an interesting scene, or describing something so vividly that they feel they are experiencing it too.
But you may not realize that writers of “informational texts” — that is, nonfiction with the purpose of informing an audience about a topic — often borrow these same techniques for the same reason: to grab people’s attention.
For this edition of Mentor Texts, we’re going to focus on a column in The Times’s Science section called Trilobites, which is devoted to “unearthing fascinating morsels of science.” All Trilobites columns are relatively short, and many of them explain fairly complex phenomena, so you might think that there would be no room for the luxury of adding a “hook” to draw in readers. After all, if you’re the kind of person who wants to know about Neanderthals, you don’t need a fun opening line to make you laugh first, right?
Well, in the case of Trilobites specifically, and Times Science journalism in general, you couldn’t be more wrong. We asked Nicholas St. Fleur, a longtime Trilobites writer and the author of the Neanderthal piece, to annotate another of his articles for us, and if you look at it you’ll see the care he lavished on his lede.
As he comments:
Of course, there are many examples, in The Times and elsewhere, of straight-to-the-point informational writing, and we’ll explore below when that might be appropriate. But most of the best STEM writing you’ll find is absorbing and memorable for the way the writer made the topic come alive. Here are some ways to do that, from the very first sentence.
What do you know about the common cold? Here is some basic information from the Mayo Clinic:
Here is more basic information from the New York Times Q&A column:
Both of these pieces are examples of “informational writing,” and you’ll notice that neither starts with an engaging hook. Instead, they get right to the point, which is what readers searching for an answer to a pressing question like “How do I get rid of my cold?” probably want. In fact, part of the reason a site like the Mayo Clinic, or a column like Q&A, is appealing is that readers already know they will find just the practical information they need with little extra embellishment.
But sometimes you need to lead your reader into a topic and show them why they should care, and that’s the case with most of what appears in Trilobites. These writers are introducing new concepts, or helping readers see old ones in new ways. We’re challenging you to do the same in our contest. We don’t want you to just impart the bare-bones facts; we want you to appeal to our senses and our imaginations; make us care; make us see the world in a new way.
So here is your first challenge. Pretend that you’re writing a short, informative piece about the common cold, but, unlike the informative pieces above, yours will be include an opening “hook.” Assume you’ll be weaving some of the factual information from The Times and the Mayo Clinic into your piece, perhaps in your body paragraphs (citing your sources, of course!). But unlike those straight-to-the-facts pieces, yours will try to intrigue your readers and get their imaginations going from your very first paragraph. How will you do that?
Here are four strategies to try, and we challenge you to test them all by writing four different first paragraphs:
1. Start with a vivid description of some kind — maybe what it feels like to have a cold, or what cold season is like in your family, school or community. Make the reader experience whatever you’re describing by using specific details that show rather than tell.
2. Start by making a common-cold-related metaphor: Having a cold is like _________. Or: Trying to treat a cold is like _________. Or: When you have a cold you feel like _________. Don’t lean on clichés; try to come up with a comparison that is new.
3. Start by asking a question that will get people’s attention, make them curious, or lead them into the facts you are about to explain.
4. Start with a story. Maybe you have a cold-related anecdote that happened to you, a friend or a relative. (It’s O.K. to use the word “I” for this exercise, and for our STEM-writing contest, as long as your story is relevant and useful.)
When you’ve tried a few, choose your favorite to read aloud to others. If you’re doing this in class, the teacher might read them aloud so the authors stay anonymous, and students can identify what’s successful about each.
Now let’s look at how the professionals do it.
Here are those same four strategies, as used in first paragraphs by various science journalists who write for The Times’s Trilobites column, Science News and Science News for Students.
Via Trilobites:
From “Swimming With the Mysterious Sardine Disco Balls of the Philippines”:
From “Your Phone Carries Chemical Clues About You, but There Are Limits to Using Them”:
From “The Mucus-Shooting Worm-Snail That Turned Up in the Florida Keys”:
From “Eight Crossings and 192 Atoms Long: the Tightest Knot Ever Tied”:
From “A Dolphin’s Recipe for Octopus”:
From “Searching for a Rectangular Sun Above the Arctic Circle”:
Via Science News for Students:
From “NASA’s Parker probe spots rogue waves and magnetic islands on the sun”:
From “Science is helping kids become math masters”:
From “Viewing virtual reality of icy landscapes may relieve pain”:
Via Trilobites:
From “Watch Bees Surf to Safety on Waves They Create”:
From “It’s a Dirty Job, but Someone Has to Do It and Not Get Eaten”:
From “Trilobite Fossils Show Conga Line Frozen for 480 Million Years”:
From “How to Talk to Fireflies”:
From “This Is What It Looks Like When an Asteroid Gets Destroyed”:
From “In the Race to Live on Land, Lichens Didn’t Beat Plants”:
Via Science News:
From “A tiny switch could redirect light between computer chips in mere nanoseconds”:
From “Piranhas and their plant-eating relatives, pacus, replace rows of teeth all at once”:
From “How tardigrades protect their DNA to defy death”:
Via Trilobites:
From “When Water Balloons Hit a Bed of Nails and Don’t Pop”:
From “Watch a Flower That Seems to Remember When Pollinators Will Come Calling”:
From “Millions of Ibises Were Mummified. But Where Did Ancient Egypt Get Them?”:
From “How Making Chocolate Is Like Mixing Concrete”:
Via Science News:
From “Vampire bat friendships endure from captivity to the wild”:
Via Trilobites:
From “Fish Depression Is Not a Joke”:
From “My Dinosaur’s Jet Lag Helps Explain Why a Time Change Is Hard”:
From “First the Worm Gets in the Bug’s Head. Then the Bug Drowns Itself.”:
From “Taking the Pulse of a Sandstone Tower in Utah”:
Via Science News for Students:
From “Don’t toss that vape”:
From “A first: Kids advise hospital researchers on their medical studies”:
The next step is obvious: Try using one of these four types of opening paragraphs to introduce a topic of your own, whether related to STEM or not.
But here are some further nuances drawn from the examples above that you may want to notice and borrow: