Was Broadway Ready for ‘Slave Play’?
“Slave Play” was never going to be an easy sell on Broadway. Two hours, no intermission, a painful consideration of racism and trauma told through the stories of three interracial couples undergoing a form of sex therapy that had them role-play as figures on an antebellum plantation.
And much of it was played for comedy.
Despite worries that it might be too incendiary for New York’s biggest stages, Jeremy O. Harris’s play, which began Off Broadway, finished its 19-week run at the 800-seat Golden Theater last week with critical acclaim but not much controversy (one edgy talkback excepted.)
It did not recoup its $3.9 million capitalization, so it was technically not a hit, but the producers said they were pleased with how well it did do, and noted that over 100,000 people saw it over the course of its run. (Very few plays recoup their costs on Broadway.)
And the show, which discounted tickets and held special events to attract a younger and more diverse audience, became the buzziest of the fall, drawing the likes of Rihanna, Donald Glover and Harry Styles.
We asked members of the cast and creative team what it was like to be part of this singular production. These interviews have been edited and condensed.
One goal of the production was to bring new audiences to Broadway. How did that work out?
Greg Nobile (producer) Just north of 30 percent of our audience were what we call “new to file,” which means they were actually first-time ticket buyers, which is an incredible number. Usually that’s in the single digits, if anything, especially for plays.
Jeremy O. Harris (playwright) Something we saw a lot was a density of black and brown people and young people in the mezzanine. When we were doing tech, I said to Robert (O’Hara, the director) — because I foresaw that, and so did Robert — “I’m only going to watch the show from the mezz, and if it doesn’t feel good to me, I’m going to yell down.”
Ato Blankson-Wood (actor, Gary) I had a lot of interactions at the stage door where people would say it was their first Broadway show — a lot more than I expected, actually. What that says to me is that all of the initiatives that Jeremy spearheaded to get different kinds of people into the theater were successful. I saw a lot more black folks, people of color, queer folks. There was a real effort to make sure they knew there was a space for them.
What about the two “blackout” nights, when the audience was made up almost entirely of black people?
Robert O’Hara (director) It felt more like church. When I walked up to my seat with five minutes to go until curtain, I realized we would never be starting on time because everyone there was communing with each other. It wasn’t just having 800 black people in the Broadway theater. We actually took over the space.
Sullivan Jones (actor, Phillip) Part of being on Broadway, there’s an industrial aspect to it. People pay the ticket price, and they put on their nice clothes and they’re showing up to see you at 8 p.m. — and it better be a damn good show. But then you have those experiences where it’s just us in a room with 800 people who are just really excited to see this thing, telling a story. It felt really pure.
Joaquina Kalukango (actress, Kaneisha) I felt like the weight of racial trauma was carried in a room full of 800 people. I didn’t have to carry it by myself, and it was one of the lightest feelings I’ve ever had. That you had the support of the whole audience in there with you fully, that fully understood the story and understood where these characters were coming from, essentially.
Blankson-Wood It just felt like the play flew.
Was it difficult to inhabit the world of “Slave Play” for so long?
Paul Alexander Nolan (actor, Jim) It does take a toll on you spiritually, as well as physically and emotionally.
Kalukango Graciously, our producers got us massages every week. We had to do a lot of energy work, a lot of clearing the space, a lot of sage (laughs), a lot of meditating. The two-show days, specifically, were always hard. By the second show, it was hard to go there again. So we would have dance parties in between, offstage.
Irene Sofia Lucio (actress, Patricia) I had to shower every night when I got home, because there’s something about the skin that you’re in in this play, and the violence that comes with it. I just noticed it was very helpful to be able to go to sleep if I took a long shower. There were rituals that the intimacy coordinator had us do. We would tap in when we started the show and we would tap out when we ended it. Little things to try to keep those two spaces separate.
Did your parents see the show?
Jones My mom saw it, and my mom is a white lady. I warned her, you shouldn’t see it, it’s too much for you, you’re going to see me in some compromising, difficult positions. Then when we started getting the buzz, I said “O.K., you’ve got to come. You just have to be a part of it.” What she said — which is interesting because I’ve heard mostly black people say this — she was like, “I didn’t understand why people were laughing in the first act.”
Blankson-Wood No, the timing didn’t work out. They live in Ghana and are retired. It also might have been self-preservation. I don’t know if I was ready to have these types of conversations with them.
There was a cyclone of outrage around the play when it ran Off Broadway, but that didn’t really materialize on Broadway. Why?
Nobile A lot of the rage came from folks who had never seen it — the internet was doing its thing. A lot more people had the opportunity to see the play. It’s not to say everyone liked the play, or agreed with what the play had to say. That’s not it at all — nor was that the goal. But the reality is, people got to see the work, and the work won.
O’Hara What changed is we were in control of the narrative. We had much more control of the images we gave out to press, and the story we were telling. We didn’t know what we had when we started it Off Broadway. We were just doing a new play by a young artist. We knew what we had on Broadway, and we knew the criticisms and we knew the different fault lines of the play. Downtown, there was no picture of anyone in the play on the billboard. Here, there was a black woman who was clearly in control, of her body and everything, on the front of the building. That told a different story than just a plantation and the words “Slave Play.”
Lucio There’s a massive difference between a space that holds 200 people [who are] very close to the stage, where every single audience member can see themselves in the mirror, and an 800-seat theater that has more space between the stage and the audience. People felt safer to laugh.
Can you call “Slave Play” a financial success?
O’Hara I thought it sold very well, because, of course, I didn’t think it would sell at all. When Greg (Nobile) the producer called me and said, “How about Broadway?” I was like, “I don’t believe a word coming out of your mouth. This is obviously a Ponzi scheme, and tomorrow I’m going to read that you’ve been hauled into jail for taking people’s money.” I was shocked every day when I saw people coming to the theater.
The central relationship in the play is between Kaneisha and Jim, and when the play ends, it’s not clear whether their marriage survives. Do they stay together?
O’Hara I haven’t the foggiest idea, and thank God I don’t have to answer that question. I think that the actors believe some nights they do, some nights they don’t.
Nolan I think they do. I’m speaking from my character’s point of view, and I want the marriage to work.
Blankson-Wood I don’t think that they do.
Nolan I think we see her asking for something from him that he’s denying her throughout the play, and in the final scene he gives it to her. To not move forward after that would be a tough pill to swallow. Otherwise, it’s too tragic a play.
Blankson-Wood What we witness in that last act is a true exorcism of our racist and violent history in America within their relationship, and I don’t think you can come back from that.
Kalukango A lot [depended on] the energy of the room, and the audience. Sometimes I feel like I need to make this clear: “They are not staying together! This is really messed up!” And sometimes you don’t know.
Harris I think that’s for you to tell me.