‘An Editor Can Save You From Yourself’: Remembering Alice Mayhew
The editor Alice Mayhew died on Tuesday at 87, leaving behind a legacy of best sellers and award-winning books. Some of the authors she worked with shared their memories of her.
I first met Alice in 1972, when Dick Snyder took Carl Bernstein, Alice and me to dinner at the Jockey Club in Washington and he told us, “She’s your editor on your Watergate book.” We debated over the next 18 months or so how to do it. Because the story was exploding, we decided we should follow that old journalism rule, write about what you know best, so we wrote a reporting book.
Alice’s genius was that she understood you’re writing for a reader, so she had a great sense of pacing — not including things that are unnecessary or that were sidetracks — and a sense for tone and presentation.
In December 1973, Carl and I were at the St. Regis. Alice would come over during the day and we’d write at night. The book was coming out in April and at that time, it was normally a year or 18 months before a book was released, so we were thinking, “My God, it’s coming out in April, that’s going to be so fast.” I remember vividly: She came over with this 90-page section, an account of our reporting efforts that led nowhere, leads that didn’t pan out, and she said, “You need to cut it.” I said “O.K., by how much?” And she said, “Cut it to two pages.” She was right.
She had that sense of how to keep the story moving. She would write in the margins, “not necessary” — it was her trademark. It could be a page, a section, an adverb, an adjective. She was serving the reader, not us, in a way. Carl and I quickly learned that’s exactly what we need, and that’s exactly what editing is about. The hymnal she sang from was: Be straightforward, be direct.
I did 19 books with her. The last one was “Fear,” about President Trump. I’m working on the second Trump book now. I talked to her 10 days ago and she was very anxious to read some material. I reminded her of her rule: She didn’t want a manuscript until it was half-done. But she said “No, I’m so anxious to see this.” I didn’t end up sending her anything.
From 1972 to 2020, that’s 48 years — it may not be an all-time record, but that’s a long time.
When Evan Thomas and I were very young Time magazine pups 35 years ago, we visited Alice Mayhew to pitch a group biography about six obscure statesmen of the Cold War era. Nobody else would have considered it. But she immediately said, “I get it. We will make it a prequel to Halberstam’s ‘The Best and the Brightest,’ and we will call it ‘The Wise Men.’” So we did. She had a laser-like ability to find a theme. Throughout our first draft, she relentlessly disciplined us to stay with a chronological narrative. “ATIGT,” she would scribble in the margin, meaning “All things in good time.” Her faith in narrative came partly from her religious training. She would always invoke the fact that most of the Bible is a narrative, starting with “In the beginning….”
I still have the massively — almost grotesquely so — marked-up manuscript that Alice returned to me when I submitted the draft for my first book, “The Teamsters.” I sometimes show it to the students I teach at Yale as an example of how, though none of us like to admit it, an editor can save you from yourself. She was fierce, tough — and also a wonderful, loyal friend.”
Alice edited every book of mine, except for my first. She became a friend as well — I would see her even though I had no business with her, just because she was full of stories and amusing things to say. As an editor, I appreciated her a lot because first, before anything else happened, she would talk about your ideas, what you were thinking about, and she would always have some advice — and she didn’t always like your ideas! I respected her judgment. And she was really good about structure — that’s often the hardest part of a book.
She was so many things. She was one of those charming people who make you feel, when you’re with them, as though there was no one else in the world but you.
I’m working on something now that was spurred on by her. When she said, “Yes, that sounds terrific,” you know that it’s a good idea, that she wasn’t faking it.
I’m still in mourning. One just couldn’t have done better than her.
Here’s how devoted Alice was to authors: In 1986, I signed to write a book for her and never did. After I returned the advance, I figured that would be the end of my relationship with her. Instead, for the next 14 years, she asked me out to lunch (usually at the Chalet Suisse, a 60-year-old restaurant at 45 West 52nd Street, far from the publishing scene) once a year to see if we could settle on a topic. I was busy with other things but she kept tossing out ideas. Finally, in 2001, we agreed on what became my first book (“The Defining Moment: F.D.R.’s Hundred Days and the Triumph of Hope”). Then the kindly conversationalist of our leisurely lunches became the tough, even merciless editor of lore. She made me cut 60 pages out of my manuscript and briskly dismissed any objections. She was right, of course. After that, I trusted her completely and we worked together in complete harmony on my two books about Barack Obama (“The Promise: President Obama, Year One” and “The Center Holds: Obama and His Enemies”). By this time, Chalet Suisse had closed and she was eating at Michael’s or the Sea Grill, where her peerless insights into American presidents and advice on structure proved indispensable.
Alice was sometimes criticized for not editing her authors enough. I’m at work on my fourth book for her and I never found that to be the case. Three weeks ago, I was on my way home from Pennsylvania. It was Saturday night and my cellphone rang. Alice had recently fallen and been hospitalized and I did not expect to hear from her. She had several brilliant insights into Jimmy Carter (the subject of my upcoming biography) and pressed me to send her several early chapters she wanted to read again. I will carry on and finish the book, but it won’t be easy. The dedication will be to Alice.
Alice was a giant! She will be remembered for decades to come. For me and for generations of writers and readers, she was our champion — indefatigable, brilliant, loyal, constantly curious about every chapter of every book. She loved what she did and we loved her as if she were a member of our families. She has been an integral part of my life for nearly four decades. I will miss her every day.
Alice had many best-selling authors, and I was not one of them. She basically picked me up, not out of a slush pile but from a trash bin of writers another editor at Simon & Schuster had decided to torment and reject. She liked my manuscript — my first book on Haiti — she loved it, I would have to say; that’s how Alice reacted to writing before she began to pick it apart and shift your chapters around, and lay them on the floor of her apartment and put the book back together piece by piece, and then call you, crowing, about how she’d solved the one big problem. She was not a line editor, to put it mildly. She was a loyal editor and I published four books with her. None of them about American presidents although I once jokingly asked her if she’d publish a presidential history, even by me. And she said “Of course.” Even, I asked, if it were about Millard Fillmore? “Absolutely.” Well, I did not write that, of course.
She always treated me like a princess. She took me to lunch at her table against the wall, smack in the middle of Michael’s on 55th Street, where she took all her writers after the restaurant she preferred, an idiosyncratic place with waitresses wearing Swiss garb, shut; I happily cannot remember its name. Of course she always paid: I teased her because in the 30-plus years I knew her it seemed that she never bought a new wallet. “I like this one,” she said defensively. She invited me and my husband to lunches and dinners at her house in Sag Harbor: I have to say I was grateful, because her social generosity seemed to me so reflexive, so democratic, so not-Manhattany.
She had a braying and appreciative laugh which I always tried to provoke, often successfully because she liked to laugh. Her obsessions, which were not mine, were Washington, D.C., presidential politics, and Catholicism, and I was just lucky that Haiti in the late 1980s touched on two of these. She was a gossip and we were always searching for mutual friends and acquaintances to discuss, mostly appreciatively. She loved ballet and would fly around the world to see something good. Mostly, she loved the human pantheon, knew everyone, and wanted to know everything they knew and more. She was voraciously curious, madly energetic, and devoted to writing and books. And at the top of Rockefeller Center in Simon & Schuster’s offices, sitting behind a big executive desk (decorated with a crowd of colorful little plastic windup toys), Alice used all that intellectual vigor and interest to fuel a generation and more of American publishing.
I was always jealous of the many journalists I knew who were her authors. Her reputation was such that I don’t think I ever heard anyone actually say her last name. It was just, “I work with Alice.” I finally got into the club.
The Times’s obituary says, “She left no survivors.” On the contrary, she left shelves of amazing books by authors whose ideas she inspired and nurtured.
She was a true polymath with boundless curiosity. Her authors wanted to work with her again and again, often over decades, and Alice gave them her unbound loyalty.