Tougher Huawei Restrictions Stall After Defense Department Objects
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration has temporarily shelved a proposed rule change that would further restrict American sales to Huawei, the Chinese telecom giant, after some officials in the Defense Department and other agencies argued that the measure, which was intended to protect national security, could actually undermine it, according to people familiar with the matter.
The rule change, which multiple government agencies were reviewing, would close a loophole that allowed technology companies like Intel and Micron to continue shipping chips, software and other products to Huawei despite a ban that prevented the Chinese company from buying some American products.
Some government officials have objected to the tougher restrictions, arguing they could discourage the use of American components abroad, weakening American firms and the country’s technological competitiveness.
The rule has been withdrawn from the Office of Management and Budget, effectively putting the tighter limits on hold. The change, along with other China technology issues, will be discussed in a meeting of President Trump’s top advisers, though a date has yet to be set, one of the people said.
The measure is the latest in a series of steps the Trump administration has taken to combat what it describes as a pressing security threat: China’s acquisition of advanced technologies that could give the country both a commercial and a military edge. Many of those efforts have focused on Huawei, which sells global telecom equipment that American officials fear will give Beijing new channels for control and surveillance. Huawei says that its networks are secure and that it does not spy for the Chinese government.
Tensions between the United States and China have eased since the countries concluded a Phase 1 trade deal. But the fate of Huawei, and the American companies that supply it, continues to hang in the balance. Last May, the Trump administration placed Huawei on a United States blacklist and moved to cut off shipments of certain goods, software and technology to the Chinese firm. In order to keep selling certain products to Huawei, companies had to apply for — and obtain — a special license.
The restrictions threatened to cut off lucrative sales for a number of American tech companies that supplied components to Huawei, including Intel, Micron and Google. Some firms, eager to continue selling to Huawei, took advantage of a loophole that allowed them to sell products made outside the United States to Huawei without a government license, as long as the products contained less than 25 percent of certain types of sensitive American content.
The proposed measure, which applies only to Huawei, would lower that threshold to 10 percent from 25 percent. It would also expand the rule so that all types of American content would count toward that 10 percent threshold.
Such a change would expand the rule’s reach beyond sensitive types of technology to include American software, chips and other components that are widely available and that Huawei could easily purchase from Taiwanese, Korean and Japanese manufacturers instead.
The exceptions to the existing rules have allowed Huawei to continue buying many of the components it needs to make its telecom networks and smartphones from American suppliers. That has allowed Huawei — the third-largest purchaser of chips globally after Apple and Samsung — to continue growing and increase its revenue, defying expectations within the tech industry and in Washington. Huawei said its sales in 2019 topped $120 billion, which was 18 percent growth over the year before — less than its initial target, but not by much.
At the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, on Tuesday, Huawei’s chief executive, Ren Zhengfei, said he expected the United States to continue escalating its campaign against Huawei, but was “confident we can survive even further attacks.”
Some trade experts say the Trump administration should have anticipated that business with Huawei would continue, since American controls on exports are designed to target only sensitive material and technologies.
But some administration officials, including Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, have been surprised that placing Huawei on the entity list, which designates companies that the United States considers a security or foreign policy threat, did not halt more business with the company.
In an interview in Davos on Thursday, Mr. Ross said Huawei had been encouraging American companies to flout federal laws, which had attracted the Commerce Department’s attention. He added that revisions to the rules were “works in progress that will come out in the near term.”
The rule, which was being considered by officials at the Commerce, Defense, Treasury, State and Energy Departments, was designed to take effect before industry had a chance to comment on it.
The Commerce Department has also been weighing a separate rule change that would expand its jurisdiction over items manufactured overseas with American technology. People familiar with the planning said that policymakers were potentially considering a far more expansive measure, but that the rule was still in the drafting stage.
The proposed measures have not been made public, and their exact scope is unclear. But reports of their existence have generated panic among companies and parts of the defense industry, said current and former government officials.
American tech companies have complained that the changes would backfire, eroding the country’s technological advantages rather than protecting them. Those changes could be particularly devastating for some segments of the semiconductor industry, where Huawei can switch to purchasing products from South Korea, Japan, Taiwan or elsewhere.
In a Dec. 5 letter to Mr. Ross, which was viewed by The New York Times, a collection of industry groups, including the Semiconductor Industry Association and the National Association of Manufacturers, wrote that the changes could reduce innovation and competitiveness in American industry, cause customers abroad to stop purchasing American technology and accelerate the offshoring of manufacturing and research.
“While we fully understand the paramount importance of maintaining our national security, we believe these actions would have serious negative consequences for U.S. economic leadership and, ultimately, U.S. national security,” the letter said.
Within government, the battle lines are blurred. The Commerce Department is split over how aggressively the government should regulate industry. Some defense officials have concerns about how the rule change will affect key military suppliers. Other senior defense officials believe the national security case for cutting Huawei off from American components overrides other concerns.
In a letter to Defense Secretary Mark Esper on Friday, three Republican senators expressed concerns about easier treatment of Huawei.
“Huawei is an arm of the Chinese Communist Party and should be treated as such,” Senators Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and Marco Rubio of Florida wrote. “We are concerned that the Defense Department is not appropriately weighing the risks.”
Officials said that the disagreement could ultimately be resolved in the next few weeks and that the rule could still move forward.
A Pentagon spokeswoman, Sue Gough, said the department was aware of Commerce’s proposed rule change, but “will not prematurely discuss ongoing interagency collaboration.”
The Trump administration has been trying, with limited success, to discourage other governments like Britain, Germany and India from allowing Huawei to construct the next generation of wireless networks.
Mr. Trump’s advisers warn that allowing Chinese companies to build 5G networks could compromise intelligence sharing between the United States and its allies. But foreign officials say the United States has not provided compelling evidence that Huawei poses a threat.
The American crackdown has prompted Huawei to try to reduce its dependence on the United States.
It recently produced handsets and telecom equipment that do not contain any American components. The company has found substitutes for some parts from suppliers in other countries, including Japan, and its in-house semiconductor unit, HiSilicon, has developed replacements for some advanced chips.
The proposed rule change could accelerate those efforts and persuade companies like Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation, which uses many American parts, to halt purchases from the United States, at least temporarily, Paul Triolo, practice head of geo-technology for Eurasia Group, wrote in a note to clients.
Industry executives say other Chinese companies are concluding that American partners are also unreliable suppliers, given the administration’s crackdown. Manufacturers of computers, air-conditioners, medical devices and other products are canceling their contracts with American firms and turning to European and Japanese products, they said.
“We want U.S.-origin technology to be consumed, we want that to be the industry standard,” said Scott Jones, a nonresident fellow with the Stimson Center. “We don’t want it to be designed out.”
But Clyde Prestowitz, the president of the Economic Strategy Institute, said the short-term costs to American companies would be worth it.
“We are engaged in a non-shooting but completely serious tech war. Keeping the most advanced chips and chip making equipment out of China will slow them down,” Mr. Prestowitz said. “So, the whining of the corporate C.E.O.s is really completely short sighted.”