‘There Aren’t Enough Words to Describe Our Pain,’ Kobe Bryant’s Wife Says
Vanessa Bryant, the widow of Kobe Bryant, posted a statement to her Instagram on Wednesday evening paying tribute to her husband and daughter Gianna, who both died in a helicopter crash on Sunday that killed seven others. In the post, Bryant thanked those who had expressed their condolences following the tragedy.
“My girls and I want to thank the millions of people who’ve shown support and love during this horrific time,” Bryant wrote. “Thank you for all the prayers. We definitely need them. We are completely devastated by the sudden loss of my adoring husband, Kobe — the amazing father of our children; and my beautiful, sweet Gianna — a loving, thoughtful, and wonderful daughter, and amazing sister to Natalia, Bianka, and Capri.”
Bryant also said she was “devastated for the families who lost their loved ones on Sunday, and we share in their grief intimately.” Earlier in the day, she changed the default picture on her Instagram to one of Kobe and Gianna.
“There aren’t enough words to describe our pain right now. I take comfort in knowing that Kobe and Gigi both knew that they were so deeply loved,” Bryant continued. “We were so incredibly blessed to have them in our lives. I wish they were here with us forever. They were our beautiful blessings taken from us too soon.” She added, “I just wish I could hug them, kiss them and bless them. Have them here with us, forever.”
Bryant concluded her post by urging those to donate to the MambaOnThree Fund, set up to “help support the other families affected by this tragedy.”
Kobe Bryant was born in Philadelphia and spent much of his youth in Italy, but he got to Los Angeles as fast as he could. Southern California gave him his glittering 20-year career with the Los Angeles Lakers, his life with his wife, Vanessa, and their four daughters, his post-N.B.A. career in coaching, and even an Oscar.
His adopted home stood ready to offer its support this week, as his family took on the grueling task of making plans to say goodbye to Bryant, 41, and his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, who were among nine people killed when a helicopter plummeted into the foggy hills of Calabasas, Calif., on Sunday.
“Laying him to rest will be something which we are here, ready to help support the family however, wherever and whenever,” Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles has said.
It took two days to recover all nine bodies at the site of the crash, and the details of any funeral plans were still being worked out on Wednesday. Any public memorial is likely draw thousands of mourners from across the city and around the country.
Bryant, a practicing Catholic, spent some of his last moments at his church, Our Lady Queen of Angels Catholic Church in Newport Beach, Calif.
“He was there to reflect and pray” and left shortly before the 7 a.m. Mass, said Tracey Kincaid, a spokeswoman for the Diocese of Orange. She said the diocese was “respecting the privacy of the family” and had not been involved in any funeral discussions as of Wednesday.
Catholic funerals typically include a full Mass at a church, followed by a burial, an option that could be a possibility for a private goodbye. But if there is a public memorial service, a sports venue in the area might be needed to host.
Staples Center, which previously hosted funerals for Michael Jackson and the rapper Nipsey Hussle, is where Bryant played as a Los Angeles Laker. The venue can hold about 20,000 people. A representative for the Staples Center said she could not comment or discuss funeral plans on Wednesday.
The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, home to the University of Southern California Trojans, is an alternative to Staples Center. It is among the largest venues in Southern California and can hold more than 77,000 people.
In a statement, the bishop in Orange County, Timothy Freyer, remembered Bryant “as a committed Catholic who loved his family and loved his faith.”
“Kobe would frequently attend Mass and sit in the back of the church so that his presence would not distract people from focusing on Christ’s Presence,” he said.
The hard job of informing the Lakers players of Bryant’s death on Sunday fell to Coach Frank Vogel, who said he went to them “one by one” as the team flew home from a road trip that had ended in Philadelphia on Saturday night.
“I just wanted to make sure everybody knew,” Vogel said. “Some of them had heard, had seen the reports — some had not. It’s just a daunting task of grabbing each guy.”
Vogel’s remarks at the team’s practice facility on Wednesday afternoon were the organization’s first public comments since Bryant and eight others, including his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, died Sunday in a helicopter crash near Los Angeles.
After the Lakers’ charter flight landed in Los Angeles on Sunday afternoon, Vogel immediately went home, he said, to hug his wife and two young daughters. Vogel said he was thinking about how involved Bryant was with his own four daughters.
“Him being a father to daughters and being involved in their sports was the most enjoyable thing in his life, from my observations. And it’s the most enjoyable thing in my life,” Vogel said. “I’m the coach of the Lakers, but it doesn’t come close to comparing to my family time. So it’s very relatable.”
At the Lakers’ request, the N.B.A. postponed the team’s game against the Clippers that was scheduled for Tuesday night. The Lakers practiced on Wednesday instead. Their first game since Bryant’s death will be Friday night at home against the Portland Trail Blazers.
Vogel was the only member of the organization to address the news media after Wednesday’s practice. He said he told his players that they did not need to speak until they felt they were ready.
LeBron James, who spoke by phone with Bryant on Saturday night after surpassing him on the N.B.A.’s career scoring list, has offered tributes to Bryant on his Instagram page. Vogel said that James and Anthony Davis, the team’s two stars, had been vocal in the aftermath of Sunday’s tragedy.
“We’ve collaborated with them on what the next few days will be like,” Vogel said, adding: “We want to represent what Kobe was about more than anything. We’ve always wanted to make him proud, and that’s not going to be any different here.”
For the first time since Bryant was leading the team a decade ago, the Lakers have real hopes of a championship. At 36-10, they have the best record in the Western Conference — and the second-best record in the league behind the Milwaukee Bucks.
“It’s just strengthened what we’ve felt all year about our current group,” Vogel said, “which is that we’ve become a family in a very short time. And it’s something you talk about in the N.B.A. with your teams, but this group in particular has really grown to love each other very rapidly, and we understand the opportunity we have this year. This has just brought us closer together.”
Fans of Bryant were as relentless in his defense as he was on the basketball court. They felt like they had to be. Theirs was a different fandom than what had existed for past N.B.A. greats like Magic Johnson and Larry Bird. It was severe tribalism as a counter to an aversion to Bryant outside of Los Angeles, a reaction to those constantly underrating Bryant’s exceptional skill — at least in their eyes.
For each time a sports fan declared that Bryant was an all-time good player instead of an all-time great, there was an equal and opposite reaction from Kobe’s fan base — known as the Mamba Army — feverishly pointing to his five championships.
Bryant was one of the few superstars whose career spanned the explosion of both the internet and social media. N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver, during an interview on Monday, noted that Bryant had entered the league shortly after the league’s website launched. Facebook, Twitter and YouTube emerged in between his championship runs. When he retired in 2016, two decades after he was drafted, he did so with a poem that quickly went viral on social media.
LeBron James said he was “heartbroken and devastated.” Michael Jordan said he was “in shock over the tragic news.”
But one basketball player will forever be associated with Bryant, sometimes even mentioned in the same breath: his friend, rival, and former Los Angeles Lakers teammate, Shaquille O’Neal.
The two formed a Lakers duo that was dynamic, at times tense and widely acknowledged as one of the top tandems in basketball history, delivering three consecutive championships for the Lakers before O’Neal was traded to the Miami Heat. The pair — who have their own Wikipedia entry called the “Shaq-Kobe feud” — eventually reconciled, to the point that O’Neal told Bryant’s daughters to call him “Uncle Shaq.”
In an emotional appearance on TNT on Tuesday, O’Neal shared that it felt like a “stabbing” in the heart when he learned that a helicopter crashed near Calabasas, Calif., on Sunday, killing Bryant, his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, and seven other people.
“Haven’t felt the pain that sharp in a while,” O’Neal said, adding, “I lost a little brother.
Emotion welled up in his voice throughout the appearance, but when a fellow sportscaster tried to offer him a break, O’Neal stopped him and pressed on.
“I think a lot of times we take stuff for granted,” said O’Neal, who recently lost his sister to cancer and lamented that he would never be able to joke with Bryant at his Hall of Fame ceremony.
“It definitely changes me,” O’Neal said. “I work a lot, you guys know. I work probably more than the average guy. But I just really have to now take time and call and say, ‘I love you.’”
Rick Fox, a former N.B.A. player, thought the many missed calls he was receiving Sunday afternoon were from friends who were checking in after hearing the news about Bryant’s death. After all, Fox was teammates with Bryant for seven seasons before retiring after the 2003-4 season.
But in fact, many of the calls came after rumors spread widely on social media that Fox himself had been aboard the helicopter that had crashed. That rumor flared Sunday afternoon before it was debunked. It was one of several false stories that circulated in the hours after the crash, as media outlets competed for scoops amid the fog of uncertainty.
In an appearance Tuesday evening on TNT, Fox said that he first heard about the rumors of his own death from his best friend, King Rice, the head men’s basketball coach at Monmouth University. “I’m seeing King’s number repeatedly going and going and going,” Rice said. “I think he’s worried about me, so I said, ‘I’m going to talk to my best friend.’ And I answered and said, ‘Hey man, this is crazy about Kobe.’ And he just was bawling, and I started crying. And he was like, ‘You’re alive.’ And I’m thinking, ‘Well, yeah, what do you mean?’”
Fox’s recounting contained an implicit warning about the kind of misinformation that can crop up on social media and in established outlets in breaking news events. One of his daughters’ biggest fears, he said, “is finding out that a parent — one of her parents — would be lost, through social media, instead of from a loved one or a family member.” (This daughter spoke to Fox after learning of the crash, he said.)
“That was hard to deal with,” Fox said of the false rumors, “because it shook a lot of people in my life.”
O’Neal’s appearance was one of several emotional tributes being widely shared online this week, as the sports world continues to reel from the news of the crash. On Tuesday, the authorities announced that the remains of all nine victims had been recovered from the crash site. As of Wednesday morning, no funeral plans for Bryant or his daughter had been publicly announced.
An ESPN anchor, Elle Duncan, spoke through tears on air recalling the time that she met Bryant when she was eight months pregnant. Upon learning that she was expecting a girl, Bryant high-fived her.
“I would have five more girls if I could,” he told her. “I’m a girl dad.”
Bryant’s role as a father to four daughters and his strong support of women’s athletics later in life have emerged as key parts in his complicated legacy, which also includes a sexual assault case from 2003 that did not lead to a conviction. Bryant apologized to the woman in 2004, acknowledging that she had not viewed their encounter as consensual, as he had.
By Wednesday, thousands of social media posts included the hashtag #girldad, as fathers posted photos of special moments with their daughters, and women expressed gratitude for the dads who raised them.
The helicopter carrying Bryant and others on their way to a youth basketball tournament fell at a rate of more than 33 feet per second and slammed into the hill in a “high-energy impact crash,” according to the National Transportation Safety Board.
The helicopter had climbed to 2,300 feet before plummeting and may have missed clearing the top of the hill by 20 to 30 feet, Jennifer Homendy, a board member of the N.T.S.B., said at a news conference on Tuesday afternoon.
It is not clear why the helicopter fell at such a fast rate, which experts said was too fast for a standard landing.
Gregory A. Feith, a former senior air safety investigator for the N.T.S.B., said on Wednesday that the speedy fall of the helicopter could indicate that it had stalled before dropping to the ground, possibly because the pilot had tried to quickly pull up when he saw the approaching hill.
The helicopter was traveling forward at about 152 miles per hour just before it crashed, according to radar data published online by FlightAware.
Photographs from the scene, published by the N.T.S.B., showed several heaps of tangled metal sitting on the side of the hill on Tuesday. Investigators recovered an iPad and a cellphone from the site, Homendy said, and had loaded pieces of the crashed helicopter onto a truck to move to a secure location.
Officials have said that the helicopter was not outfitted with a system to warn pilots if they are getting too close to the ground, technology that is voluntary but has been recommended by the N.T.S.B. for more than a decade.
It is too early to know whether the lack of the warning system played a role in Sunday’s crash.
The pilot, Ara Zobayan, 50, had years of experience and had made the same trip the day before in clear conditions, roughly 90 miles from John Wayne Airport in Orange County, Calif., where Bryant lived, to Camarillo, near Bryant’s Mamba Sports Academy, which was hosting a youth basketball tournament over the weekend.
Zobayan had logged more than 8,200 hours of flight time, officials said, at least 1,250 of which were in the Sikorsky S-76B, the model of helicopter he was piloting on Sunday.
Roberto Clemente’s death at 38 in a 1972 plane crash shocked the sports world. One of the best players in baseball history, he had been on a cargo plane that was attempting to deliver aid to earthquake victims in Nicaragua.
After Bryant’s death this weekend, Steve Blass, a teammate of Clemente’s on the Pittsburgh Pirates, thought back to the 4 a.m. phone call that awakened him on New Year’s Day in 1973.
There were no grief counselors then, Blass said, so Clemente’s teammates had to handle their emotions as best they could. The team chartered a plane to a memorial service in Puerto Rico, where Clemente grew up. Blass delivered one of the eulogies.
But over the coming months, he recalled, the sadness continued to come in waves: during the first spring training without Clemente, the first opening day without him, the first wins and the first losses.
“The grieving is universal, but it’s also so personal,” Blass said. “It’s all of those things.”