Letter of Recommendation: John Waters’s ‘Desperate Living’
For a small but dedicated cadre of fans, “Desperate Living,” John Waters’s fifth and most difficult to watch commercial feature, released in 1977, occupies the highest peak atop the director’s trash heap of a filmography.
Here’s how the film begins: Hours after being discharged from a psychiatric hospital, a housewife named Peggy Gravel flees Baltimore’s affluent Guilford neighborhood, where she has just murdered her husband. Her accomplice is her 400-pound maid, Grizelda Brown. Peggy speaks in a screech of affronted privilege, and her politics are right-wing grotesque. As she pilots her white Mercedes along a wooded road, she exclaims: “Look at those disgusting trees stealing my oxygen! … I want cement covering every blade of grass in this nation. Don’t we taxpayers have a voice anymore?” Later, they flee to Mortville, a kind of shantytown haven for criminals and other social and sexual outcasts, and the long-­suffering Grizelda boils over, setting Peggy straight about their predicament: “We killed your husband, and I ain’t your maid anymore, bitch, I’m your sister in crime!”
By most measures, “Desperate Living” is Waters’s least successful film. It was the sole early project made without his star, Divine; Waters described it as “a lesbian melodrama about revolution,” but “Desperate Living” managed to offend so many lesbians that their protests prevented it from being shown in Boston, Waters has claimed. It managed to offend nearly everyone else too, by pursuing violence and grossness further than any other film in Waters’s — and possibly anyone else’s — body of work. The opening credit sequence shows a woman daintily carving a real rat served on fine china, and the rest of the action treats viewers to an act of self-­castration, an eye being gouged out with a stiletto heel, a woman being asphyxiated in a bowl of dog food and a great many sex scenes, some regrettably unforgettable. Reviewing the film in The New York Times, Janet Maslin wrote, “You could look far and wide to find a more pointlessly ugly movie than John Waters’s ‘Desperate Living,’ but why would you bother?”
I cherish the film for its cathartic honesty — there are days when living in New York makes me feel like both Peggy and Grizelda. But I marvel at it too, for being Waters’s most epic story — it widens the director’s scope from a handful of characters to an entire society. Unlike the Sirkian melodrama of “Polyester” or the period nostalgia of “Hairspray,” the political satire in “Desperate Living” is relentless and confrontational. I’ve now watched the film, joyously, at least a dozen times, but only recently did it dawn on me how disturbingly prescient it happens to be. It imagines an America that in 1977, during the early Carter years, must have seemed like preposterous parody but today appears merely descriptive. Like a gaudy, gold-­plated revolver, “Desperate Living” points to our current political situation with unsettling aim.
Consider Mortville. (“Not as in ‘death,’ ” Waters explained to me recently, “but as in ‘mortified.’ ”) It is a model of inequality: Its residents live in grinding poverty, all except their ruler, the bejeweled Queen Carlotta, who operates the town as a tourist attraction; early in the film, we see slumming visitors in fur coats snapping photos of the destitute locals (did Waters predict Instagram, too?). “I’m not responsible for your income, your living conditions or your personal happiness,” Carlotta announces to her hapless subjects. While they subsist on roadkill, she feasts on pizza and marshmallows.
You can’t help noticing certain parallels between Carlotta and the current head of our executive branch. She’s grandiose: “Every word I ever utter,” she announces, “is to be taken as a direct royal proclamation.” She thrives on insults: While being paraded past Mortville’s citizens atop a litter, she greets them by shouting: “Hi, Stupid. Hi, Ugly.” She’s grossly libidinous: After one of her soldiers, dressed in S. & M. gear, strips for her, she spanks him, memorably exclaiming, “This will teach you to arouse royalty.” And she manages to co-opt otherwise respectable conservatives into joining her regime: By the film’s end, Peggy has become Carlotta’s second ­in ­command — a twitchy, distaff Mike Pence — and is scheming to inject all of Mortville with rabies.
Waters’s subjects have always been the signifiers and manners of American class, and Mortville is a uniquely American dystopia. Carlotta enforces her brand of fascism not with fiery speeches but with entertaining vulgarity and daily outrages that mask harsh, top-down class warfare. Perhaps that’s why — in an age of Mar-­a-­Lago and Alex Jones — America has finally come to resemble one of Waters’s movies. Fortunately for us, though, the political prognosis isn’t all bleak. In a surprise happy ending, the hungry citizens of Mortville rise up and overthrow their despotic queen, and the film ends on a Breughel-­like scene of them dancing around Carlotta, cooked and trussed upon a platter, an apple stuffed in her mouth.
Recently I asked Waters whether he intended “Desperate Living” to be a study in American despotism, or whether, like a broken clock that’s right twice a day, it has merely found its moment. “I’m not totally sure what I was thinking when I made it,” Waters told me. He went on to say that he thought Donald Trump had ruined bad taste. “His isn’t even funny,” he lamented.