Max Frankel: Dining Without the Din
To the Editor:
Re “Noisy Restaurant? What’s the Problem?,” by Pete Wells (Critic’s Notebook, Jan. 22):
I am the benighted editor who many years ago asked The Times’s food critics to assess, among other things, the noise level in reviewed restaurants.
I discovered that I and a few others past middle age no longer enjoyed shouting over their entree and that conversation, and some distance from the conversation at neighboring tables, contributed mightily to the enjoyment of the finest dishes.
That your current critic prefers distracting noise and digests better in a din is understandable; he does not pay for his nightly ventures out and in fact is paid for obsessive concentration on the dishes before him. He may be so preoccupied that it never occurs to him that some folks incur the cost of restaurants because they want to savor the chatter of friends and hear the sound of breaking bread.
A good critic is also a reporter, and he is not required to be deaf to the concerns of other diners.
Max Frankel
New York
The writer is a former executive editor of The New York Times.
To the Editor:
Re “Cuts to Food Stamps Squeeze West Virginia’s Poor” (front page, Jan. 14):
In the world’s richest country and one in which we throw away a distressingly large amount of our food, why should we deny government help to the hungry?
Even if they are able-bodied, let’s feed them, not punish them. A punitive attitude toward those who need food is nothing to take pride in.
Aric Press
Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Re “Robert Caro’s Papers Find a Home” (Arts pages, Jan. 9):
The acquisition of the biographer Robert Caro’s papers by the New-York Historical Society is like the acquisition of Julia Child’s kitchen by the Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History. Julia had outlines of her pots and pans on the wall, and Mr. Caro has outlines of his book chapters in his office, presumably to be included in the historical society’s exhibition.
Both people demonstrated their organizational skills with precision. My motto: Eat first, then read.
Francine Zorn Trachtenberg
Washington