What to Watch For in Trump’s Impeachment Trial on Tuesday
President Trump’s lawyers will complete their third and final day of oral arguments on Tuesday, wrapping up a defense that has sought to give Republican senators reasonable doubt and present them with alternative explanations for the president’s actions toward Ukraine.
Their assignment grew more difficult on Sunday after the revelation that John R. Bolton, the former White House national security adviser, wrote in an unpublished manuscript that Mr. Trump refused to release military aid for Ukraine until the country provided investigative information on his political rivals. That corroborates a central element of the abuse of power charge against Mr. Trump, which accuses him of using his position to pressure a foreign power to interfere on his behalf in the 2020 election.
Now, the question is whether the disclosure will move enough Republican senators to join Democrats in insisting on calling Mr. Bolton as a witness in the impeachment trial.
What we’re expecting to see: A summation of the president’s legal defense, including a strong argument against calling witnesses who would shed more light on Mr. Trump’s actions. His legal team will seek to drive home the argument that the House made a shoddy case, and the Senate need not reach in and bolster it by hearing new evidence.
When we’re likely to see it: The trial will convene at 1 p.m. and could stretch into the evening. Mr. Trump’s lawyers have used less than half of the 24 hours they were allotted, although they are not expected to take all of their time.
How to follow it: The New York Times’s congressional and White House teams will be following all the developments. Visit nytimes.com for coverage throughout the day.
News of Mr. Bolton’s forthcoming book landed like a bombshell in the middle of the impeachment trial, angering some Republicans who complained privately that they had been blindsided by the White House and snarling plans for a quick move to an acquittal of Mr. Trump as early as Friday.
Republican moderates like Senators Mitt Romney of Utah and Susan Collins of Maine are now more likely than ever to vote for witnesses, although it is not clear whether others like Lamar Alexander of Tennessee were moved by the disclosures. Still, on Monday several more conservative Republicans expressed a new openness to hear from witnesses, suggesting that Mr. Bolton’s account may have changed the game.
Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, cautioned his colleagues to remain calm and reserve judgment, but Republicans are already whispering among themselves about a potential negotiation over witnesses, and Democrats — who need only four Republicans to join them in voting to hear new evidence — are ratcheting up the pressure.
As Mr. Trump’s team wraps up its case and quiet discussions continue over whether to call witnesses, senators are turning their attention to their first opportunity to participate actively in the impeachment trial, during a 16-hour question-and-answer session.
Under the rules, the senators — who are sworn to silence during the impeachment trial — will submit written questions to the House impeachment managers and the president’s legal team through Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., who is presiding over the trial. Chief Justice Roberts will read the questions aloud, alternating between Republicans and Democrats.
The questions are a chance for senators to gain a better understanding of the facts presented during the oral arguments, but they are also strategic opportunities for each side to focus on the aspects of the case most favorable to them. The process could begin as soon as Mr. Trump’s legal team completes its presentation.