Head-Scarf Ban and Carbon Taxes: Austria Gets an Unlikely Government
BERLIN — Seven months after his coalition with the far right collapsed in a spectacular scandal, Sebastian Kurz, Austria’s former conservative chancellor, stood before television cameras on Thursday and announced a new government — this time with the progressive Greens.
“We chose a new path,” Mr. Kurz beamed. “It was a challenge for both sides, because the differences between the two sides are big.”
The result, he said, was a new kind of compromise. “We did not try to negotiate the lowest common denominator but consciously tried to unite the best of both worlds,” Mr. Kurz said. “That’s how it is possible that both the Greens could keep their central campaign promises and so could the People’s Party.”
Werner Kogler, the Greens leader, who will serve as vice chancellor, put it more bluntly: “We were elected for different things.”
That’s how, in a 300-page coalition contract presented in Vienna on Thursday, plans for a head scarf ban for Muslim girls and deportation centers for unsuccessful asylum seekers sat side by side with a carbon tax on airline tickets and a target to make Austria carbon neutral by 2040.
As far as political transformations go, it was certainly remarkable — and it was being watched closely in neighboring European countries, where identity politics and climate change have crystallized as two main political fault lines in the Continent’s simmering culture wars.
Since Austria’s snap elections in September, it had been unclear whether Mr. Kurz would revive a politically costly coalition with the far right or reach across the political spectrum to the Greens, his ideological opposites.
With the pivot, Mr. Kurz seems intent on demonstrating a willingness to make the ideological compromises needed for a stable government and rehabilitate his reputation abroad, where his partnership with the far right had raised eyebrows.
For Austria’s Greens, who have never been in government at the national level, the coalition presents a chance to show that their party is capable of governing with an establishment conservative party at the top level.
If it succeeds, it may set an example for other European democracies, where Green parties appear poised to enter government coalitions.
Across Europe, the Greens have been buoyed by a recent surge of support as issues like climate change rise on the political agenda and traditional Social Democratic parties collapse. The new Austrian coalition may prove to be a harbinger especially for Germany, where there is talk of forming a similar coalition after the next election, slated for 2021.
But in Austria there is no doubt that the unlikely partners will make for what many expect to be an awkward and uncomfortable pairing, disagreeing as they do on important issues, especially immigration.
“From the perspective of the Austrian People’s Party, there is no other party that is ideologically further removed than the Greens,” said Laurenz Ennser-Jedenastik, a political scientist at the University of Vienna.
Mr. Kogler, the Greens’ leader, acknowledged as much in the news conference on Thursday. He stressed repeatedly that his party’s decision to join forces with Mr. Kurz was also a question of “responsibility” to keep the far-right Freedom Party out of power.
“It’s important to remember the alternative,” he said.
But, noted Peter Filzmaier, a professor of politics at Danube University Krems, “Kurz was also short on alternatives.”
A renewed coalition with the far right or the Social Democrats would have resulted in parliamentary majorities, but both those parties were “in deep internal crises and not very reliable,” he said.
If nothing else, the new coalition shows Mr. Kurz’s skills as a political chameleon.
After co-opting much of the far-right Freedom Party’s anti-immigrant message, Mr. Kurz had in effect promised to rein in the party by bringing it into his last government. But even from his own camp he was criticized for instead enabling and sanitizing the far right, which likened migrants to rats and campaigned with material that evoked Nazi propaganda.
The new coalition with the Greens may provide Mr. Kurz with a chance to remove some of the stain of that association.
Although Mr. Kurz took pains to deny it, governing the country with the far right had become increasingly difficult.
Freedom Party members were criticized not only for their anti-immigrant language, but also for their links to far-right extremist groups. A raid of the intelligence services, apparently at the behest of the Freedom Party interior minister, became the subject of an intensive government inquiry.
After just 16 months in office together, their coalition ended last May, when a video emerged in which Vice Chancellor Heinz-Christian Strache, the Freedom Party’s leader, was seen asking for election interference from a woman he thought to be the niece of a Russian oligarch.
Saying “enough is enough,” Mr. Kurz dissolved his government and started campaigning immediately.
In September’s balloting, Mr. Kurz’s secured 37.5 percent of vote, showing that the scandal and the short-lived coalition with the Freedom Party had not fatally hurt him.
But his party did not win enough seats to govern the country on its own, and with their support surging — they won nearly 14 percent of the vote — the Greens became an appealing, if unlikely, alternative.
Still, Mr. Kurz had not excluded the possibility of another coalition with either the Freedom Party, which lost significant support in the election, or, less controversially, the Social Democrats, which has also seen its support erode.
The Greens were helped by the scandals that plagued the Freedom Party after it was kicked out of the government, but they were also given a lift by the growing urgency over environmental concerns, above all climate change, especially among young voters.
For the Greens, the coalition will test their own flexibility and whether they can work with Mr. Kurz, with whom they are at odds on issues like migration and economic policies.
In addition to a tax of 12 euros, just over $13, on every airline ticket sold, the coalition contract includes plans to make trains cheaper, extend public transport across Austria and create a task force to transform Austria’s taxation system into one that is ecologically and socially sustainable.
Austria is a small country, Mr. Kogler said, but one that can be “an example and ideally a pioneer in Europe.”
Although the People’s Party and the Greens work together in three states in Austria, this is the first time they will do so on the national stage, a significant distinction because of the relative weakness of state governments in Austria.
But it is not the first time in Europe that Green parties will enter a national government. They have been in coalitions in Finland, the Czech Republic, Ireland and, most famously, Germany, where they governed with the Social Democrats from 1998 to 2005.
But it became clear that, Mr. Kurz, who centered his re-election campaign on promises not only to lower taxes but also to pursue a tough line on illegal migration, intends to keep many of his campaign promises.
“Migration policy will remain at the core of my political agenda,” he said on Thursday.
The first question at the news conference was telling: Was there still a trace of the far right in the coalition pact?
“There have to be compromises in a parliamentary democracy,” Mr. Kogler replied. Such compromises, he conceded, could be “painful.”
In negotiating future policy, the Greens may be helped by  high court decisions that reversed anti-immigrant moves made by the previous government. Mr. Kurz’ latest proposal is to ban the head scarf for girls up age 14.
Under the agreement, the People’s Party takes control of 11 ministries, including most of the important ones — the chancellery, the finance, foreign and interior ministries — while the Greens take over four, including a newly organized environment ministry.
The governing agreement must still be approved by Green party members, who will meet this weekend to discuss and vote on the agreement, though passage seems nearly certain. The People’s Party faces no such hurdle.
If the vote passes, the government can be presented next week. And Mr. Kurz, at 33, can begin his second term as Austria’s youngest chancellor.