Got a Raise? It’s Time to Bump Up Your Savings, Too
Getting a raise is a good thing, right? It is unless you increase your spending each time you get a bump in pay. The result may be that you’ll fall short of what you need for retirement.
Raises, oddly, “can actually make it harder to achieve a comfortable retirement,” according to a new analysis from the investment research firm Morningstar.
The prime culprit is lifestyle “creep.” A fatter paycheck makes people feel richer, so they feel empowered to buy that fancy car or bigger house, said Steve Wendel, head of behavioral science at Morningstar. But as their expenses grow, they risk falling behind on retirement savings if they stick to saving the same proportion of their income.
If your salary goes to $120,000 from $100,000 and you keep saving 10 percent of your income, you’ll be saving more in absolute terms — an extra $2,000. But you really need to save even more if you want to keep that fancier lifestyle in retirement — and many people don’t, the research found.
Morningstar analyzed data from a big retirement plan manager to compare the average change in savings rates for people who got a raise and those who didn’t. It turns out that there was little difference between the two groups. People tend to save about the same, in percentage terms, regardless of whether they got a boost in pay.
“When people get a raise, they’re not putting it aside,” Mr. Wendel said.
Other sources of retirement income, like Social Security, are relatively fixed, the report noted. (Social Security payments do increase with wages, but only up to certain limits.) So people living more lavishly need to save more. Older people, in particular, need to save more — even if they’ve been diligent savers — because they have less time to catch up before retirement.
Just how much more should people save? Morningstar suggested a simple rule of thumb: Each time you get a raise, spend a percentage of it that’s twice the number of years to retirement — and save the rest. That means if you expect to retire in 10 years, you can spend 20 percent of the raise, guilt free.
Younger people can safely spend more of the raise because they have more time for their investments to grow. Those with 30 years to retirement could spend about 60 percent of their raise, under the rule.
(To arrive at its guidance, Morningstar analyzed data from the Federal Reserve’s 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances, focusing on 1,619 households that were participating in a workplace retirement plan. The analysis calculated how much of a theoretical 5 percent raise would need to be saved to match retirement with the higher standard of living the raise brings.)
The rule’s focus on how much of a raise could be spent, rather than how much should be saved, helps keep people from feeling deprived, Mr. Wendel said.
It also helps people commit in advance to set aside a certain proportion of their raise to ease the sting of not spending it all. “It doesn’t hurt as much to save a future raise,” he said.
Many employers, drawing on behavioral economics research, now include automatic annual increases in paycheck contributions — sometimes called “automatic escalation” — in their retirement savings plans. But the option to automatically save a certain amount of a raise is less common, Morningstar said. The Plan Sponsor Council of America, an industry group, said it did not yet track whether companies offered such a feature.
Rules of thumb can help simplify complex calculations for savers, Mr. Wendel said, but for a detailed analysis of your retirement finances, it may help to seek professional advice.
Here are some questions and answers about saving for retirement:
What if this rule of thumb for saving a portion of my raise is a stretch for me?
Other guidelines can be helpful, if less than ideal, Morningstar found. One is to “save your age,” as a percentage of the raise. If you’re 30, you should save 30 percent of the raise; if you’re 50, save half.
Alternatively, save at least 33 percent of your raise. If your take-home pay increased by $1,000, you should save at least $333.
These two options, however, work best for savers in their 20s, 30s and 40s and become less effective as people age. The “spend twice your years to retirement” rule works across all age groups, the report said, because it usually involves saving the most money. Still, it may be financially difficult for some people to put into action.
What if I don’t have a workplace retirement plan?
The rule works if you have an individual retirement account but may require more attention on your part. Ideally, if you save in an I.R.A., you should establish regular transfers from your checking account — or even a split deposit of your paycheck — into the I.R.A., timed to your paycheck deposits, to reduce the temptation to spend the money.
“If your paycheck hits on the 15th, set up a transfer for the 17th,” said Cheryl A. Costa, a financial planner in Framingham, Mass.
When you get a raise, increase the size of your transfers accordingly.
The message people should internalize, Mr. Wendel said, remains the same: “I always save part of my raise.”
Money is tight, and I don’t get regular raises. What can I do?
Save as much as you reasonably can, and don’t worry if you have to start small, said Gary Koenig, vice president for economic and consumer security at the AARP Public Policy Institute, which focuses on issues related to older Americans.
Some people may be discouraged by oft-cited guidelines, like saving 10 or 15 percent of your paycheck, so they don’t even try, he said. But a big barrier to retirement saving is just getting started. Enrolling in a retirement plan or opening an I.R.A. and saving just 1 percent of your paycheck can get things rolling, and you can build from there.
“It’s actually a big step,” Mr. Koenig said.
When you get extra cash — like a bonus, an income tax refund or even reimbursements from a workplace flexible spending account — put the money toward retirement, suggests the National Association of Personal Financial Advisors, a group for fee-only financial planners.
“Have a policy that when you get money you weren’t expecting, a certain percentage goes into some form of savings,” said Tyler Reeves, a financial planner in Birmingham, Ala.
A part-time job can help generate extra cash for savings, Ms. Costa said. The new gig economy offers more flexibility, she said. You could sign up through an online service for, say, a few hours of dog walking on the weekend, when it may be less likely to conflict with your main job.
If you’re disciplined, consider a cash-back credit card, like one from Fidelity or Schwab, that automatically contributes a percentage of your spending into a linked retirement account. But pay off your card balance in full each month, Ms. Costa warned. Otherwise, interest paid on the card will torpedo any savings.
And treat yourself — within reason. If you meet a savings goal, Mr. Reeves said, allow yourself a small reward, like dinner at a nice restaurant.
“Carve out a little,” he said, “to enjoy life in the moment.”