Northern Ireland Now Has a Government, but Schools and Hospitals Are in Crisis
LONDON — The dust covers came off Northern Ireland’s regional government this month after a three-year period of political paralysis and dysfunction, laying bare a state of deep crisis across the territory’s neglected public and political institutions.
Residents of Northern Ireland expressed relief after the breakthrough, especially as it comes in time for Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union on Jan. 31 and will mean that the region has representation to set out its priorities in the process. But many wonder whether and how the regional government will be able to overhaul public services like health and education that have declined to the point of near collapse.
“Having three years without institutions in which parties really either didn’t speak to each other to restore the institutions or were not willing to reach any sort of compromise has had an impact on the trust in the institution,” said Elodie Fabre, a politics expert at Queen’s University Belfast.
“Whereas right now there’s a bit of optimism,” she said, “there’s also a lot of cynicism over how this is all going to solved and how the parties are going to work together again.”
Power sharing was restored at Stormont, the regional legislature that had collapsed in 2017 over sectarian divides on social and cultural policies, after the main political parties reached an agreement brokered by the governments of Britain and the Republic of Ireland.
Its dual leadership structure consists of two parties: Sinn Fein, which supports unification with the Republic of Ireland; and the Democratic Unionist Party, which wants Northern Ireland to remain part of the United Kingdom. Both lost support in last month’s British general election because of their inability to solve their political differences and revive their regional government.
As the region’s newly appointed ministers started to tackle some of the key issues last week, they faced major stumbling blocks over how to pay for the pledges made in the government’s new agreement.
The British government said that it would inject 2 billion pounds, about $2.6 billion, into Stormont’s budget to support the new deal. But the region’s finance minister, Conor Murphey, described the offer as an “act of bad faith” that falls short of what is needed.
“The bottom line is with this proposed package, our public services face a shortfall of at least £1 billion next year alone,” he said in a statement.
Julian Smith, Britain’s secretary of state for Northern Ireland, defended the proposed financial package and urged the region’s ministers to “get on with it.”
Stormont’s top priority is to save the health and social care service. Both the first minister and the deputy first minister made commitments during the assembly’s first sitting on Saturday to put the health service before party politics.
The health minister, Robin Swann, pledged £109 million to settle a dispute with thousands of nurses who have been carrying out strikes for weeks over pay parity and staffing shortages.
“Pay parity with England can be restored,” he told lawmakers. “Our nurses and other great health and social care workers can come off the picket line, can get back to the job that they love and do so well.”
The nurses welcomed the announcement but said they would not end the strike until they had received a formal commitment from the minister on safe staffing levels.
“From the period that we have worked without an assembly, our nurse vacancy in that period doubled,” said Pat Cullen, the director of the Royal College of Nursing, “simply because we had no decision makers in place, no one in charge, no political leadership and everything was just in a state of inertia.”
Northern Ireland has the highest rate of nurse vacancies in the United Kingdom, at 14 percent — the equivalent of about 2,800 nurses absent from work each day. Ms. Cullen says the gap has placed huge pressure on nursing staff, who are presenting with mental health issues and sickness resulting from trying to fill the empty slots.
“They are not able to switch off, because as soon as they get home the phone starts to ring, and a manager is begging and pleading with them to come in the next day and fill in for someone,” Ms. Cullen said. “They never get a break.”
“Then, when they get to work,” she said, “they are having to care for the patients that are in the 24 beds within their ward, but finding that there’s another four or five beds lined up on the corridors.”
Northern Ireland’s health service is also struggling to cope with hospital waiting lists that have expanded to record levels. About 300,000 people are waiting for treatment, according to figures published by Britain’s Department of Health.
More than 100,000 people have been on a waiting list for over a year for surgeries like hip or knee replacements, Ms. Cullen said.
Education is another critical issue. The government will have to settle a long-running dispute with teachers over pay and workload, as well as helping hundreds of financially stretched schools. More than 400 schools in Northern Ireland — 22 percent of the total — were unable to balance their books in 2019, according to the region’s Education Authority.
“The value of the budget that’s been going to schools has been going down year by year while the total enrollment numbers in schools has been going up,” said Tony Gallagher, a professor of education at Queen’s University Belfast.
“The practical problem is how schools can deliver the curriculum they’re supposed to deliver,” he said. “Sometimes they’re using part-time teachers. Sometimes they’re trying to use all sorts of cover.”
Sara Long, the Education Authority’s director, says that another urgent matter is how to look after students with complex special educational needs, whose numbers have increased in recent years.
Northern Ireland’s education minister, Peter Weir, said last week that he would put £45 million from a government education enhancement program toward improving 18 schools.
“For any incoming minister, there are major challenges out there in terms of resources,” he told lawmakers, adding that “there is a very strong need to ensure that we get the best possible delivery for all our children.”
The region is also grappling with the consequences of its bloody three-decade guerrilla war, which ended in 1998.
Northern Ireland has one of the highest suicide rates in the world, and although there are numerous underlying factors, such as poverty and underfunded mental health services, experts point especially to post-traumatic stress disorder stemming from the conflict.
“The trauma of the conflict does not just affect people who were involved in it,” Ms. Fabre said. “There’s a generational element that gets passed down to young people today.”
The region, she added, “is paying for the reconstruction of Northern Irish society on top of everything else.”