Musicians Love the Conductor Kirill Petrenko. It Shows.
BERLIN — When he conducts, Kirill Petrenko presents a paradox: How can an artist so mysteriously shy and monastic offstage manage to steal the spotlight whenever he’s on?
Mr. Petrenko — who is deep into his inaugural season as the chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic, which he led in Mahler’s Sixth Symphony here on Thursday — doesn’t grant interviews to the press. He only rarely (and reluctantly) releases recordings.
“I prefer,” he once said, “to speak through my work on the podium.”
When he speaks that way, in his conducting, it’s with his entire body. Mr. Petrenko’s face is a private theater for his players — emotive and joyful, with veins on the sides of his forehead that bulge to the tides of musical phrases. He tenses his shoulders, twists his torso and practically crouches in retreat. Whether big or small, his gestures wield uncanny authority; he can remind you of Mickey Mouse in “Fantasia,” able to sculpt the ocean itself with just a scoop of his hand.
Somehow, it works. Look up old videos of Leonard Bernstein conducting Mahler, and you’ll see how an approach like this can go wrong: Bernstein looks mannered, overemotional, performatively in search of transcendence. But Mr. Petrenko’s conducting, for all its theatricality, is without pretense. You can trace a clear line from his movements to the character of his orchestra’s sound; the strike of a tightly held fist elicited the chilling beat of a funeral march.
That’s because musicians listen to him: Whether in Berlin or in Munich, where he has been the Bavarian State Opera’s music director since 2013, players are unusually devoted to Mr. Petrenko. Audiences, too, cheer him with a kind of enthusiasm more familiar from arena sports.
This does mean that Mr. Petrenko tends to be the focus when he conducts, for better or worse. In Munich, he regularly attracts more applause than even the starriest singers. And after Thursday’s sold-out concert in Berlin (the program will be streamed through the Philharmonic’s Digital Concert Hall on Saturday), his name could be heard repeatedly on the walk from the Philharmonie to the trains at Potsdamer Platz nearby.
The Philharmonic’s players elected him to the chief conductor post in 2015 after he’d led the orchestra only three times, and he’s appeared here only a few times so far this season. Each piece is still a proving ground; few are as daunting as Mahler’s Sixth.
This passionate 80-minute work requires an extremely sure hand, as well as a stance on historically fraught issues like the order of the inner movements — the Andante came before the Scherzo on Thursday — and whether to restore the third, excised hammer blow in the finale. (Mr. Petrenko didn’t.)
Whatever decisions Mr. Petrenko made, the Philharmonic players seemed willing to follow. Call it a lingering honeymoon glow, but they responded to his every gesture with enthusiasm and virtually flawless precision — especially in the brasses. He is at the very least a worthy custodian of this storied ensemble’s sound; Thursday’s concert showed promise for much more.
The opening march’s headlong momentum was frighteningly articulated, with the bows of cellos crunching against strings. When, after nearly three minutes, a gentler theme was introduced — a portrait of Mahler’s wife, Alma, if she, one of music history’s most unreliable narrators, is to be believed — it was bitterly ironic, a term of endearment through clenched teeth. It’s a mood that carried to the chaotically happy ending of the first movement, here sounding more like hubris than a reprieve.
Mr. Petrenko’s reading of the inner movements was remarkably lucid, making a persuasive case for the Sixth as one of Mahler’s most logically constructed symphonies. Even more impressive, though, was how he maintained clarity through the 30-minute finale, which unfolds as an epic drama of a hero’s downfall.
This movement, full of hope that ebbs and flows in counterpoint with despair, comes nearly an hour into the symphony; it’s all too easy to lose control or slip into stormy hysterics. Mr. Petrenko was neither overblown nor restrained, with a focus on teasing out intricacies and echoes from previous movements that give the Sixth its programmatic cohesion.
As the audience applauded, Mr. Petrenko waited nearly a minute before turning to face it. He may have wanted the ovations to be for the orchestra first, but he was, once again, the star.
I left the Philharmonie thinking about how Mr. Petrenko might be best suited to works like Mahler’s Sixth, in which a mastery of structure coexists with dramatic flexibility. During the past year and a half in Munich — where he and the Bavarian State Opera’s general manager, Nikolaus Bachler, have made that house the global destination for opera — I have heard him lead six works by Wagner, as well as pieces by Verdi and Korngold and a program of, believe it or not, show tunes. Through video recordings, including the Digital Concert Hall, I have also seen him conduct Berg’s “Lulu” and Strauss’s “Salome,” along with symphonies by Beethoven and, in a welcome surprise, Josef Suk.
Taken as a whole, this varied slate reveals a conductor with gifts and flaws. Mr. Petrenko’s exacting approach mesmerized in “Parsifal” — the opening bars, with an unearthly balance of freedom and control, seemed to exist beyond measured time — and he has uncovered prestige in seemingly superficial places, like Gershwin’s “An American in Paris.”
But Mr. Petrenko’s interpretations can sometimes feel cold. His “Otello” in Munich — as obsessed with detail as the opera’s tragic hero is with his wife’s infidelity — was downright chilly. A similar frostiness permeated a recent performance in Berlin of Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto that was often at odds with its more freewheeling soloist, Daniel Barenboim. It’s no surprise that Mr. Petrenko’s true Beethoven triumph was last August, in the Ninth Symphony, whose Romanticism leans more toward Wagner than does the concerto’s Classicism.
A more glaring deficiency, however, is Mr. Petrenko’s apparent allergy to contemporary music. This season, he has claimed his modernist bona fides — leading Berg and Schoenberg works that aren’t far from their centennials. And there are few living composers among the Philharmonic’s coming programs even with guest conductors. His predecessor, Simon Rattle, transformed and updated the orchestra’s repertoire; so far, it doesn’t look like Mr. Petrenko is interested in doing the same.
Which is mystifying, not least because, when the Berliners were still under Mr. Rattle’s leadership, Mr. Petrenko was once brought in to conduct John Adams’s “The Wound-Dresser,” from 1988. He did it wonderfully. So what’s holding him back now?