‘At 5 P.M., a Woman in a Mechanized Wheelchair Is Loading a Dryer’
Dear Diary:
The corner laundromat is narrow, with blue walls and a small TV that plays the news in Spanish. A hand-lettered sign taped to the doorway reads, “Last Wash 7 p.m., Close 9 p.m.”
At 5 p.m., a woman in a mechanized wheelchair is loading a dryer. Her daughter, wearing a pristine elementary school uniform, is helping.
A woman who works at the laundromat is eating dinner at a table in the back with her two young children. She stands and comes over to help the daughter insert a money card into a dryer and select the temperature.
“No, please keep it,” the woman in the wheelchair says as the laundry woman hands back the card. “You help us every week.”
The woman in the wheelchair and her daughter leave the laundromat. I hold the door for them and follow them out. As they head off, a cloth falls from the wheelchair’s arm rest. Neither the woman nor her daughter notice.
Another woman, holding an infant on her hip, reaches down carefully and plucks the cloth off the sidewalk.
“Hello,” she calls. “You dropped something!”
The woman in the wheelchair stops, turns and smiles.
“Thank you,” she says. “Thank you.”
— Juliana Francis Kelly
Dear Diary:
She lies on her side, knees pulled up and back curved over, her bag on the subway floor just below her bare feet turning her into a quiet question mark.
Two seats away, he leans his oiled head back and stretches his suited self out straight. A filthy paper plate inches from his polished shoes is the dot that makes his body the indifferent exclamation point of an answer.
— Ani Buk
Dear Diary:
Come waltz with me down to the Strand, love,
Eighteen miles of books we’ll peruse.
Please turn off your phone, take my hand, love,
Think of all of the novels we’ll choose.
Mr. Barnes, Mr. Noble are decent,
As they fill a prosaical niche.
Though most of their stock is too recent,
And I don’t want to browse smelling quiche.
Come wander with me in the Strand, dear,
We’ll roam amid tables and nooks,
I won’t order online, understand, dear,
Algorithms are not meant for books.
Let’s hobnob with writers prolific,
Davids Mamet, Sedaris and Ives.
Zoë Heller is truly terrific,
As sharp as Rendellian knives.
Stephen King, Philip Roth, Arthur Miller,
McCracken, McCullers, Chabon.
Something clever, or poignant, a thriller,
With a book one is never alone.
We’ll read Highsmith and Hellman and Hamill,
And Dominick Dunne, Roald Dahl.
With the thirst of a greedy, parched camel,
We’ll buy ’em and we’ll read ’em all!
To the temple, the mosque, to the cloister —
Climb the ladder and we’ll search the shelves.
Finding pearls inside every oyster,
Finding all of the parts of ourselves.
Come waltz with me down to the Strand, love,
For Singer, for Steinbeck, for Poe,
That’s what I got and it’s planned, love.
Now, get off the couch and let’s go.
— Lou Craft
Dear Diary:
I was in a window seat aboard a train bound for Port Washington that had been sitting in Penn Station for a while. I was alone in the car. My consciousness had thinned into a 1 a.m. gossamer. I knew I wouldn’t be reading the book I had with me.
She floated down the aisle just before the doors closed and halted in front of me. Judging by the faraway look in her eyes, she might as well have been dreaming already.
Without a word, she stuck her ticket into the back of the seat on the aisle of the row I was in. She slumped down, resting her head on her folded arms in the seat between us.
I sat wooden in my seat, not knowing whether to even breathe. She stayed silent until the conductor came for our tickets. When she spoke, it was barely more than a whisper.
“Wake me before Manhasset, please,” she said.
I mumbled something back and tried to busy myself with my book. As expected, it was a lost cause.
Out of the corner of my eye, I could see her tiny frame rise and fall with each silent breath. She looked to be around 23, certainly not older than my 26. I wondered whether I should be worried for her. I didn’t know her, after all. But I worry over everything.
I woke her as the train pulled out of Great Neck.
“What time is it?” she asked.
Not too late, I said.
When I woke up, the train was stopped at Port Washington. The engine was off and the doors were closed.
I didn’t remember falling asleep.
— Kendall Bates
Dear Diary:
It was a beautiful, warm day. My wife (77) and I (82) decided to walk from our apartment at 67th Street to Zabar’s at 80th.
After securing an ample supply of lox and herring, we felt we could complete the entire round-trip on foot. After a few blocks, though, we needed to rest.
We sat down at an empty bus stop. A bus appeared. We remained seated. As the driver slowed down, I waved him on.
Nonetheless, he stopped right in front of us. He opened the front door and leaned toward us.
”Are you folks waiting for the bus to Miami?” he said.
— Mitchell Jacobs
Read all recent entries and our submissions guidelines. Reach us via email diary@nytimes.com or follow @NYTMetro on Twitter.