Staatsballett Berlin Leaders to Leave Prematurely
BERLIN — Sasha Waltz and Johannes Ohman, the joint artistic directors of the Staatsballet Berlin, announced this week they would step down at the end of 2020, though they’ve run the company together since only last year and signed on with five-year contracts.
According to a news release from the Staatsballett, Mr. Ohman is leaving to lead Dansens Hus, a contemporary dance center in his hometown, Stockholm. Ms. Waltz, a German choreographer who has long been based in Berlin and maintains a company in her name here, did not want to continue leading the Staatsballett on her own, the release said.
She will continue to work with the company through the 2021-22 season, after which she will return to independent choreography full time.
The Staatsballett, though one of Germany’s leading ballet companies, is still relatively young: It was founded in 2004 through a consolidation of the dance troupes from Berlin’s three opera houses. Its brief history has not been without controversy. Defenders of the classical tradition bristled at the hiring of the Spanish contemporary choreographer Nacho Duato in 2014, and his tenure remained troubled.
In 2016, Ms. Waltz and Mr. Ohman — then director of the Royal Swedish Ballet — were named as Mr. Duato’s successors, with five-year contracts to start at the end of his term in 2019. Dancers from the Staatsballett quickly posted a petition in protest, saying that Ms. Waltz and Mr. Ohman’s appointment was politically, rather than artistically, motivated. (Michael Müller, who hired them, was up for re-election as Berlin’s mayor.) The petition also said that Ms. Waltz’s style, more in the tradition of Pina Bausch-style “tanztheater” than classical ballet, was not an appropriate fit for the company.
Still, Mr. Ohman officially started with the Staatsballett in 2018, and Ms. Waltz followed last year. They aimed for a balance of classical tradition and modern dance. In the joint statement announcing their departure, they said that they believed their mission had been a success, citing healthy attendance figures and an honor from the magazine Tanz, which surveyed 25 dance journalists and named the Staatsballett its company of the year for 2019.
“We are very pleased with the award, which confirms our vision for Staatsballett Berlin after a difficult start,” they said in a statement at the time. “Last year we were able to show that it is possible to preserve the classical legacy while at the same time helping to shape the present and future of dance at a high level.”