In Jenny Offill’s ‘Weather,’ Paranoia Is Delivered With Humor
My wife refuses to use Lyft or Uber in Manhattan because she thinks they’re evil. She thinks I’m a moral cretin for liking both so much. We don’t agree to disagree. We fight it out every time we step outside.
In Jenny Offill’s melancholy and satirical third novel, “Weather,” there’s a small subplot about the narrator’s friendship with a car service driver in New York City. His name is Mr. Jimmy, as if he were Mick Jagger’s friend in “You Can’t Always Get What You Want.”
The narrator, Lizzie, can’t afford car services, not really. She’s a librarian who pays for garlic with pennies at the bodega. She and her husband worry about losing their dental insurance. Lizzie scans their apartment for her “least depressing underwear.” They’re not selling plasma, but things are tight. Lizzie grinds her teeth in her sleep.
In “Weather,” Offill is interested in the things we can save and the things we cannot. Lizzie calls Mr. Jimmy for rides to work because he’s threatened by the Lyfts and Ubers of the world; she thinks she can help him and his disabled son. Her other relief missions have more wobble in them. She’s trying desperately to save her brother, Henry, a former drug addict and a troubled soul.
[ This book was one of our most anticipated titles of February. See the full list. ]
Lizzie experienced the last presidential election as a personal disaster. She reads the dread news about climate change. (“No more apples soon; apples need frost.”) She wonders if she can save her husband and young son by becoming a doomsday prepper, or at least a doomsday prepper manqué. She’s begun to hoard weird tips she finds online, like how to start a fire with a gum wrapper and a battery.
Her husband, Ben, is a gentle classics scholar who now makes educational video games. He ingests too much news, too, like a goose dementedly stuffing its own liver. He wonders if it’s time to buy a gun.
Lizzie wears her paranoia lightly; she has a sense of humor about herself. “My book-ordering history is definitely going to get me flagged by some evil government algorithm,” she thinks.
She dropped out of grad school because her brother needed her. She has a sense of humor about that, too. While describing a public intellectual named Sylvia, she comments: “Years ago, I was her grad student, but then I gave up on it. She used to check in on me sometimes to see if I was still squandering my promise.” Her life has been, if not absolutely disappointing, then at least a series of “tiny lost virginities,” to borrow words from the poet A.E. Stallings.
As with Offill’s last novel, “Dept. of Speculation,” “Weather” is written not so much in consecutive paragraphs of narration but in often square blocks of text, each set off by white space, as if they were stanzas. They’re the work of a curator who likes a spare hang. Each paragraph is a little lonely, like a figure in an Edward Hopper painting.
These parcels of feeling and intellect drop out one at a time, like packs from a cigarette machine. All the others descend down a slot, awaiting their turn. The effect of this style is to put a pause after every paragraph, to hold it up for a little extra light and a little extra examination, to allow it to linger in the mind.
There’s a bit of the brilliant Lydia Davis in Offill. Davis is the writer who said that she was “not interested, at this point, in creating narrative scenes between characters.”
There’s a bit of David Markson in Offill, too. He’s the writer whose books were mostly made up of unusual facts and anecdotes, which he used to build surprisingly strong novelistic bird’s nests. Offill deploys a lot of sometimes ironic, sometimes plaintive factoids about subjects like the animal world, prepping and Eastern religion.
Offill’s writing is often brisk and comic, and her book’s format underlines her gifts. Here’s a fairly typical paragraph:
“I spend some time pulling books for the doomed adjunct. He has been working on his dissertation for 11 years. I give him reams of copy paper. Binder clips and pens. He is writing about a philosopher I have never heard of. He is minor, but instrumental, he told me. Minor but instrumental!”
There’s a drawback to this format, too. Not every paragraph in a standard novel needs to shine. If you are Theodore Dreiser, no paragraph needs to shine at all. But when each paragraph in a short novel is cocooned in consecrating white space, as they are in “Weather,” the weaker ones can read like off notes rather than merely the veins or arteries that carry a story along.
Here’s another fairly typical paragraph: “Funny how when you’re married all you want is to be anonymous to each other again, but when you’re anonymous all you want is to be married and reading together in bed.” This is true; so true that it’s a truism. In a different novel, you’d slide right past it. But in “Weather,” it’s written on a card thumbtacked to a wall.
Offill has genuine gifts as a comic novelist. “Weather” is her most soulful book, as well. Lizzie’s relationship with her brother delivers heartbreak after heartbreak. She’s pretty funny about him, too. “‘Where did all these hipsters come from?’ says my brother in his fleece-lined trucker’s jacket.” Offill’s humor is saving humor; it’s as if she’s splashing vinegar to deglaze a pan.