7 Things to Do With Your Kids in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
APOLLO OPEN HOUSE 2020: FOR THE COOL KIDS at the Apollo Theater (Feb. 1, 1-6 p.m.). Black History Month begins in Manhattan at a place that made history itself: the Apollo Theater, the landmark building and eminent showcase for African-American talent. Its free open house, which is also part of a citywide initiative celebrating the centennial of the Harlem Renaissance, will include For the Cool Kids, a series of events for children on the theater’s soundstage. (Because space is limited, families are asked to R.S.V.P. online for no more than two programs per person.) The choices comprise Oom Bop Sh’Bam, the National Jazz Museum in Harlem’s introduction to its specialty; a screening of “The Rhythm and Roots of Arthur,” a music-filled special from PBS Kids; Alexander Elisa’s “What Is Cool About Harlem,” a session of tale weaving and crafts from the Sugar Hill Children’s Museum of Art & Storytelling; a showing of Riley S. Wilson’s “Little Apple,” a streaming science fiction series featuring a young heroine, from ImageNation Cinema; and “I Have a Song Inside My Heart,” an exploration of jazz and blues presented by the radio station WBGO.
apollotheater.org
BAMKIDS FILM FESTIVAL at BAM Rose Cinemas (Feb. 1-2, 10 a.m.-3 p.m.). The Brooklyn Academy of Music promises to be a bit of a zoo this weekend, and not just because it will be filled with active and excited children. You will also encounter a rhinoceros, an elephant, a little gray wolf, a sloth, a peacock, a lion, a tiger and many other creatures, which will all visit the academy’s screens as part of the annual BAMkids Film Festival. Consisting of 87 works for ages 3 to 11, the event will offer titles from 30 countries, including Russia, China, India, Croatia and Colombia. Although some programs are sold out, tickets remain for screenings like Cat-tastic Tales!, which features a global range of feline-themed animation on both days of the festival, and Animanimals, a Saturday showcase of the talents of the German writer and director Julia Ocker. In addition to movies, the festival will offer interactive games, a stop-motion animation workshop and live entertainment by a magician and circus artists.
718-636-4100, bam.org
CHINESE NEW YEAR FAMILY FESTIVAL at China Institute (Feb. 2, noon-4 p.m.). A New Yorker might well raise an eyebrow at the idea of celebrating the rat. This animal, however, is the first in the Chinese zodiac, which associates it with energy, optimism and quick-wittedness, not dirt and decay. China Institute’s free festival will welcome this rodent-themed Lunar New Year with an outdoor lion dance (weather permitting) and themed entertainment, including two interactive presentations by the author Sarah Brennan of her children’s book “The Tale of Run Run Rat,” whose hero’s quest to travel through China leads to an encounter with the Beijing Olympics. Chinese Theater Works will also perform folk stories and songs in its zodiac-themed puppet show “Hao Bang-Ah, Mouse!” (The festival offers workshops, too, which charge admission and tend to sell out; check the website for availability.)
212-744-8181, chinainstitute.org
HIBERNATORS HYGGE WEEKEND at Wave Hill (Feb. 1-2, 10 a.m.-3:30 p.m.). How many cultural institutions let you visit in your pajamas? Wave Hill, a public garden in the Bronx, actually encourages sleepwear for its annual celebration of hibernating wildlife and all things hygge (pronounced hoo-guh), a Danish word that translates roughly as “cozy.” The fun on both days will include a hibernators’ den, where children can curl up with books and puppets, and a family art project involving the creation of dreamy masks (slumbering animals are a suggested model). Each afternoon will also feature a presentation: On Saturday, Taylor Ouellette of the Hudson Highlands Nature Museum will visit with live creatures like a mouse and a snake to explain the winter survival strategies of different species, and on Sunday, the conservationist Danielle Gustafson will discuss how bats cope with the season and contribute to the environment. Sunday also offers the yearly Hibernators Ball, a chance for little humans to wake up and learn to waltz to the music of the ensemble Jody Kruskal and Friends.
718-549-3200, wavehill.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
PUP RALLY PUPPY BOWL VIEWING PARTY at Boris & Horton (Feb. 2, 2:30-5 p.m.). While millions will watch the Super Bowl on Sunday, there are still crowds that would rather view puppies chasing one another down a field than grown men running and tackling. If your family shares those sentiments, Animal Planet’s televised Puppy Bowl XVI is for you, and so is this celebration at Boris & Horton, an East Village cafe that welcomes dogs as well as their owners. The Puppy Bowl referee and announcer Dan Schachner will host the viewing party with Mocha, a beloved canine athlete. A fund-raiser for the organization Foster Dogs, the event will offer more than food, drink, games and prizes: Furry friends will also attend, all seeking to score permanent homes.
212-510-8986, puppybowlparty.splashthat.com
‘WARRIORS DON’T CRY’ at the Sheen Center for Thought & Culture (Jan. 31, 11 a.m.; Feb. 1, 2 p.m.). Young idealists have always been central to movements for social change, but even the most spirited activists can become discouraged. That’s how the character called Ya Girl feels at the starts of this play, produced for tweens and teenagers by the Bushnell Center for the Performing Arts and TheaterWorksUSA. Conceived by Donnetta Lavinia Grays and Tamilla Woodard, and written by Grays, “Warriors Don’t Cry” chronicles Ya Girl’s reawakening after a figure from the past contacts her and introduces her to an earlier struggle. That pioneer is Melba Pattillo Beals, whose memoir of the same title, an account of her experiences as one of the nine students integrating Little Rock Central High School in 1957, is the basis for the script. Although seats on Friday are sold out, theatergoers can still buy tickets for the Saturday performance of the show, which uses Beals’s story, poetry, video projections and original music by Toshi Reagon to inspire Ya Girl — and the audience.
212-925-2812, sheencenter.org
YE VAGABONDS FAMILY CONCERT: AN IMBOLC AND BRIGID’S DAY CELEBRATION at the Irish Arts Center (Feb. 1, 2 p.m.). Spring still seems a long way off, but perhaps that’s all the more reason to pay tribute to it in February. That’s the purpose of Imbolc, a Celtic festival that honors not only the approaching season but also Brigid, the goddess of fertility. (She evolved into St. Brigid.) This year at the Irish Arts Center, Ye Vagabonds, made up of the brothers Brian and Diarmuid Mac Gloinn, will treat families to traditional folk tunes while Gregory Corbino, an artist, illustrates the ballads by unfurling what are called crankies: painted scrolls controlled by a hand crank. After the concert, children can enjoy hot chocolate and create their own spring-inspired crankies and candles. (Tickets are currently sold out, but seats may become available; a waiting list is online.)
866-811-4111, irishartscenter.org