Strip the World Series Title From the Astros
To the Editor:
Re “Technology, Once Astros’ Ally, Helps Do Them In” (On Baseball column, Jan. 14):
In reviewing the Houston Astros’ sign-stealing scandal, Tyler Kepner writes that “M.L.B. wisely did not vacate the Astros’ title.” Yet, according to the Major League Baseball report, a number of Astros players and coaches actively participated in stealing and transmitting signs, and the rest were aware of the cheating but did nothing to stop it. It was a team effort.
Moreover, the cheating was not just an abstract moral failing. How much it contributed to team wins may be impossible to quantify, but it clearly had some impact.
The best way to ensure that it never happens again would be to strip the Astros of the very prize the cheating helped enable. Removal from the championship history books would restore the integrity of the game in a way no monetary fine, suspension or asterisk can hope to accomplish.
Gus Oliver
New York
To the Editor:
Re “More Smoking After a Vaping Tax?” (The Upshot, Jan. 7):
As a cardiologist who sees daily the deleterious effect of cigarette smoking in my patients, I take a much different lesson from the Minnesota experience with taxing vaping products. Taxing tobacco products reduces their use, and any tax on e-cigarettes should be accompanied by a parallel increase in taxes on standard cigarettes.
This will retain the price advantage for e-cigarettes while continuing to deter youth smoking.
Rachel Marcus
Washington
To the Editor:
Re “Protect Veterans From Fraud” (editorial, Jan. 1):
We agree that noncompliant schools should be held accountable for their actions, and we support oversight from accreditors and other regulators at the federal and state level.
We settled with the Federal Trade Commission — without agreeing with its allegations regarding an advertising campaign that ended more than five years ago — because we are focused on the future and our students’ ambitions and goals.
The University of Phoenix is continuously innovating our approach to adult learning. We regularly seek feedback from employer partners to ensure that our programs are meeting the needs of a rapidly advancing workplace.
As outlined in our Academic Annual Report, we are committed to continuous improvement of our programs and outcomes. This report details the many ways we are making innovation a priority in the interest of our students, including veterans.
The editorial board should not insinuate otherwise and demean the accomplishments of our one million graduates, who have worked hard to earn their degrees at our accredited university.
Peter Cohen
Phoenix
The writer is president of the University of Phoenix.