Comprehend
MONDAY PUZZLE — Before the advent of laptop computers, I used to doodle my way through business meetings.
Everyone seems to take notes in computer text programs now, but a pen and a pad of note paper were my sword and shield against the mundane, and I wielded them like a warrior. Not only did it allow my brain to roam freely — which was better for coming up with ideas, anyway — but it was a spiffy way to look as if you were paying attention. Or at least taking notes.
The trick was to look up once in a while at the people who were speaking, nod vigorously at the last thing they said, maybe even ask them to step aside so I could see the remarkably illuminating charts they worked so hard on and then dive right back into my “note taking,” as if I had just been told where I could find the Holy Grail.
That was if I liked them. If they were the sort of people who made my life difficult at work, the routine was to look up, furrow my brow, ask them to go back a slide, utter a vague, “Uh huh …” and then dive back into my doodling while shaking my head, which never failed to throw them off their game. That might seem unfair, but it helps to remember that this was the cutthroat world of New York City ad agencies in the 1980s, and it was every doodler for themselves.
This, to me, illustrates exactly how powerful art can be. And the constructor Evan Kalish offers us a crossword puzzle that proves my point.
6D. GAG REELS makes its debut in this puzzle. You might also know them as blooper reels. Watch the Season 3 GAG REEL from NBC’s “The Good Place”:
33D. Tricky one. The “quintet to which ‘y’ is often added” are the vowels, AEIOU.
The revealer clue at 56A says “Comprehend … or what 20-, 29- and 47-Across do, finally,” and that word “finally” suggests that we should be looking at the end of each theme entry. The revealer answer is GET THE PICTURE, and the last word in each of the theme entries is a synonym for a picture.
For example, at 20A, the answer to the clue “Cinnamon-and-sugar cookie” is SNICKERDOODLE, which makes its New York Times Crossword debut. Similarly, the “Televised activity with Ping-Pong balls” is a LOTTO DRAWING.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
Your thoughts?