New in Paperback: ‘Prisoner’ and ‘All My Puny Sorrows’
PRISONER: My 544 Days in an Iranian Prison ― Solitary Confinement, a Sham Trial, High-Stakes Diplomacy, and the Extraordinary Efforts It Took to Get Me Out, by Jason Rezaian. (Ecco, 311 pp., $17.99.) Rezaian, an Iranian-American former Washington Post Tehran bureau chief, weaves family history into this account of his arrest on espionage charges. Our reviewer, Michael J. Totten, called it a “memoir that reads like a thriller.”
ALL MY PUNY SORROWS, by Miriam Toews. (Bloomsbury, 311 pp., $16.) In Toews’s seventh book an adrift single mother travels from Toronto to Winnipeg to care for her sister, a successful concert pianist who has attempted suicide. In these pages, Curtis Sittenfeld praised “its intelligence, its honesty and, above all, its compassion,” calling the novel “irresistible.”
A PEOPLE’S HISTORY OF HEAVEN, by Mathangi Subramanian. (Algonquin, 301 pp., $15.95.) Set in a Bangalore slum whose name, Swarga, means “Heaven” in Sanskrit, this first novel follows the interwined lives of five close friends as they face individual hardships and fight together to save their neighborhood from demolition. Our reviewer, Diksha Basu, called the novel “a strong debut.”
AMERICAN DIALOGUE: The Founders and Us, by Joseph J. Ellis. (Vintage, 283 pp., $17.) This latest book by the eminent historian Ellis moves back and forth in time between the nation’s founding era and our own, charting the “ongoing conversation” that shapes American democracy. Ellis “draws connections between our history and our present reality with an authority that few other authors can muster,” Jeff Shesol noted here.
ALL THE LIVES WE EVER LIVED: Seeking Solace in Virginia Woolf, By Katharine Smyth. (Broadway, 326 pp., $17.) In this memoir Smyth uses “To the Lighthouse” as the through-line for her life, connecting Woolf’s novel to her own memories as she grapples with her father’s death after his descent into alcoholism. Our reviewer, Radhika Jones, wrote that the book “could itself become solace for people navigating their way through the complexities of grief for their fallen idols.”
BRIDGE OF CLAY, by Markus Zusak. (Knopf, 537 pp., $14.99.) Zusak’s long-awaited follow-up to “The Book Thief” is set in Australia, where five brothers confront the death of their mother and the disappearance of their father. Jen Doll wrote here that “the characters are clearly loved, and the artistry of language will leave you gasping at times.”