Lesson of the Day: ‘Holding Tight to a Racing Tradition’
Featured Article: “Holding Tight to a Racing Tradition” by Victor J. Blue
Indian Relay is a type of bareback horse racing that is popular for some Native American families and communities in the Plains states and parts of Canada. In this lesson, you will learn about how one family has passed down the tradition of Indian Relay. You will also have the chance to think about cultural traditions in your own family.
Note to teachers: We believe that the length of the article and its use of imagery could make this article accessible for a wide range of classes, including middle school students and English language learners.
Have you ever watched or participated in a relay race? Typically, members on a team take turns to complete different parts of a course. A relay race could include swimming, running, cycling or another physical activity. In Indian Relay, the participants ride horses and each rider goes around the track three times, changing horses after each circuit.
To give you an idea of what Indian Relay looks like, watch at least the first three minutes of the documentary “Fast Horse” by Alexandra Lazarowich:
Now, answer these questions about the first three minutes of the documentary:
As you read the featured article, keep in mind some of the visuals you have already seen of Indian Relay in action.
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. What facts stood out to you most about Richard Long Feather’s upbringing? Why do you think the writer chose to include information about language and family when describing Richard?
2. What was Richard’s journey that led him to get involved in Indian Relay?
3. Using examples from the article, how would you defend the statement that Richard believes it is important for his family to be involved in Indian Relay?
4. What has the training process been like for Jace Long Feather? Does it remind you of your own experience training for a sport or other competitive event?
5. The article states that families come to the Crow Fair to participate in the events and to “celebrate their heritage.” How do you see the Long Feather family celebrating their heritage through Indian Relay?
Option 1: Image Inquiry
Skim the article again and circle or highlight three words that you believe best summarize Indian Relay and the importance of the competition for families.
Then choose three photographs from the article that you believe best embody or express the three words you selected. Look closely at all of the images and consider some of the following questions from our Critiquing a Photograph work sheet:
Option 2: Sports in Your Family
Are there sports or other competitive events that you do with your family? Does your family preserve traditions around dance, hunting, yoga or gymnastics? Maybe you prefer watching sports on TV with your family members or going to sports games. Or do you connect and preserve traditions with your family in other ways, like hand-clapping games, farming, a common love for math or sharing recipes?
Choose one meaningful tradition in your family. It could be related to playing or watching sports or something entirely different that is important to your family’s culture, heritage and traditions. Now, describe a compelling moment in that family tradition. You can use the first three paragraphs of the featured article for inspiration:
As you select a powerful moment from your own family tradition to write about, see if you can bring that moment to life by choosing descriptive language, employing metaphors and making a strong choice about tone and voice.
Reflect on the following as you write: