Trump’s Mideast Plan: Good for Whom?
To the Editor:
Re “U.S. Unveils Plan on Mideast Peace” (front page, Jan. 29):
Anyone serious about achieving peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians knows that there are three main issues that will require compromise: the status of Jerusalem, the future of Israeli settlements in the West Bank and the eventual borders of a Palestinian state.
President Trump’s so-called peace plan bows entirely to Israel’s demands on all three of those crucial issues. Jerusalem will remain largely unified and under Israel’s control. Settlements will be kept intact and annexed as part of Israel. Palestine’s borders will be a jumbled, indefensible mess.
This is not a serious plan. It is a blank check written by a president facing an impeachment trial and handed to an Israeli prime minister indicted on corruption charges.
Not only will this plan fail to achieve peace, but it will also set back American efforts in the Middle East for years to come.
Jess Coleman
New York
To the Editor:
The Palestinians, who rejected the new peace plan before it was even announced, complain that they had no input. Seems that if you reject participating in the process, chances are you’ll have no input.
As for there being nothing in it for the Palestinians, I would think that offering them a state, having part of Jerusalem as their capital, linking their cities in Judea and Samaria with Gaza, and supplying $50 billion for economic development is not exactly “nothing.”
Seems like Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leader, now serving Year 14 of a four-year term, is hellbent on having his legacy be one of hatred, violence and rejection instead of bringing economic prosperity and peace to his people — another blown opportunity!
Howard B. Weber
New York
The writer is president of the Coalition for Israel.
To the Editor:
Re “Auschwitz Survivors Warn Against Silence in Face of New Perils” (front page, Jan. 28):
With the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz bringing attention to the horrors of the Holocaust, we need to be reminded of what these brave survivors have said: that we need to call out hatred wherever we see it.
Even today, we see the demonization of marginalized populations, the twisting of history and the minimizing of others’ suffering. This anniversary and the courage the survivors have demonstrated are a reminder that we should never turn a blind eye to others’ suffering because we never know who will be the next target.
Edwin Andrews
Malden, Mass.
To the Editor:
Re “Gay Men Are Dying From Another Crisis” (Op-Ed, Jan. 23):
Thanks to Jim Mangia for shining a light on this growing problem within the gay community.
As a gay man who got caught in the web of crystal meth addiction, I know firsthand the devastation this drug can cause. My use not only resulted in long-term, irreversible health consequences, but it also drained my bank account, derailed my career, almost destroyed my relationship and took me to depths of darkness I never imagined.
That said, I consider myself incredibly lucky, as after multiple efforts I’ve managed to get some distance from the drug. Others are not so fortunate. I’ve heard more than my fair share of stories of men ending up in psych wards or losing everything (including their lives).
As a community, we need to rally to meet this ravaging wave of addiction and loss head-on. If there is one lesson that we should have learned from the AIDS epidemic, it’s that delaying action can have devastating consequences. Another storm is coming, and we need to be ready.
John R.
New York