Police Chief Made Fiery Claim Over MS-13 Murder. Records Dispute It.
Four days after a confidential witness in a case against the MS-13 gang was murdered on Long Island, the local police commissioner identified what he said was one of the causes of the brutal crime: the state’s new criminal justice policies.
The commissioner, Patrick Ryder of Nassau County, said that because of a new law, the witness’s information had been shared “too early” with defense teams. Commissioner Ryder suggested that the release of information had led to the murder of the witness a day before he was scheduled to testify in court.
“We’re asking Albany to go back, rethink it, come back then with changes to that law,” Commissioner Ryder said. “But it needs to happen quickly, before we have another victim, as in this case.”
But an examination of court records on Thursday indicated that in fact the information was never disclosed to the defendants in the case — and that the new criminal justice policies had nothing to do with the murder of Wilmer Maldonado Rodriguez.
The assertions surrounding the killing have underscored the volatile politics around the state’s new criminal justice laws. Excoriated by criminal justice advocates, Commissioner Ryder walked back his comments on Wednesday night, saying there was “no direct link between the death of Wilmer Maldonado Rodriguez and criminal justice reform.”
The Nassau County district attorney’s office declined to comment on Commissioner Ryder’s claims. In its own statement, the office drew no links between Mr. Rodriguez’s death and criminal justice policies.
According to court documents, Mr. Rodriguez’s identity was under protective order starting in December 2018.
That order was modified in December 2019, to allow prosecutors to share investigative information with defense lawyers. But Mr. Rodriguez’s identity remained under protective seal. In court Thursday, both defense lawyers confirmed they had never passed his name to their respective clients.
“The names were never disclosed,” said Greg Madey, the lawyer for Denis Pineda, one of the two defendants Mr. Rodriguez was supposed to testify against.
It remains unclear what, if any, connection Mr. Rodriguez’s murder had to his testimony. Justin Feinman, another defense attorney, said the defendants and Mr. Rodriguez appeared to be familiar with one another outside of the court proceeding.
“These people seem to be known to each other in 2018,” said Mr. Feinman, who represents another defendant, Elian Ramos Velasquez. “Forget about 2020, in 2018 it seems that the victims had some familiarity with the alleged attackers, and vice versa.”
Previously, New York had been one of only 10 states that allowed prosecutors to wait until the eve of a trial to turn over their investigative findings.
Under new laws, which went into effect in January, prosecutors are required to give defense teams discovery material — which can include the names of confidential witnesses — 15 days after a person is arraigned in court.
The new law also allows prosecutors to request that certain information, like names, be kept under seal in order to protect confidential witnesses.
“Prosecutors can still seek protective orders,” said Kate Levine, a law professor at the Cardozo School of Law. “There’s no change to how or whether prosecutors can seek a protective order for one of their witnesses.”
In October 2018, Mr. Rodriguez stepped in to help two boys who were being bullied by alleged members of the MS-13 gang, a vicious criminal organization with ties to El Salvador.
The gang has become something of a rallying cry for President Trump, who has referenced its violence — and its long-established presence on Long Island — to bolster support for his immigration policies.
Mr. Rodriguez was stabbed and viciously beaten with a baseball bat by the gang members, officials said. Still, he agreed to testify against his attackers, who were arrested and charged with assault and witness intimidation in connection with the attack.
A judge issued a protective order that December, shielding Mr. Rodriguez’s name from disclosure.
As the case’s trial date — Jan. 6, 2020 — inched closer, prosecutors began discussing how to transfer their discovery material to defense lawyers.
On Dec. 10, 2019, Judge Helene F. Gugerty ordered prosectors to begin producing their investigative material to the defense teams, who were forbidden to disclose any of the information, including Mr. Rodriguez’s name, to their clients before Jan. 6.
When the parties arrived in court on Jan. 6, 2020, Nassau County prosecutors said they were not prepared for trial, and requested that the date be moved. All of the defense lawyers confirmed that they had not yet shared any discovery information with their clients, and that they would uphold the court’s order until the trial date.
A county prosecutor agreed to allow defense lawyers to share certain discovery information with their clients, but specifically asked that any witness names, like Mr. Rodriguez’s, not be shared. Both defense attorneys agreed to those terms.
“I have no problem withholding the names of the victims,” Mr. Madey said in court.
Mr. Rodriguez was found Sunday behind an abandoned home in the town of New Cassel on Long Island, officials said. Mr. Rodriguez, who was homeless at the time, had been beaten and left to die.