She Is 96 and Does Not Fear Her Death. But Do Her Children?
It was the year of saying goodbye.
In 2015, The Times began following six people age 85 and up, documenting their journeys through a stage of life that is often invisible.
Four were still alive at the start of 2019. Jonas Mekas, 96, began the year at home from the hospital, tired, hoping to finish a film he was making for a performance of Verdi’s Requiem. “Another year,” he said last New Year’s Day. “Hope it will be busy and productive.”
On Jan. 23, he asked his son, Sebastian, to sit him upright in a chair — a preparation, Sebastian said, for his spirit to go forward to the next adventure. He died at the small wooden table where he’d sat with so many friends.
Jonas was the last of the three men in the Times series. Of the three women, two also died in 2019. Both were 95.
In late December, Ruth Willig, 96, learned that she was the only one left. “Ohhhh,” she said, taking it in. “What happened? Am I the only one? I’m going to cry.”
Death had been a regular part of our conversations over the past five years, as it had been with the others. Ruth had been consistent: she did not worry much about death, but she did think about how she would go. Would it be painful or drawn out? Would she become a burden to her children?
“You saw I was almost crying before when you told me about that,” she said. “It really hit me. I can’t believe….” She stopped.
Finally, she said, “I’m ready, I am. But I worry about my children. They’re so devoted to me. It scares me.”
It is one of the most vexing chapters of old age: how to navigate not just the inevitable ending, but the days and months immediately before it. As the bonds of support and dependency change, how do we tell our children that it is O.K. to say goodbye? And how do we tell our parents that it is O.K. to go?
For the elders and their families in the Times series, the deaths were all different, the emotional preparations even more so. None were what anyone had hoped. As predictable as death in old age has become, families still have little guidance for the last stretch of life.
Fred Jones died just days after one of his daughters died, in April 2016; John Sorensen, who said on every visit that he wanted to die, died in June that year, missing his partner of 60 years. Jonas died with finished manuscripts around him; Ping Wong had a stroke and refused her daughter’s entreaties to eat; Helen Moses closed her eyes in early December and never opened them again, dying five days later, a talkative woman reduced to silence.
Few left instructions for what they expected of their families.
“The whole thing becomes so frightening that people don’t want to discuss it,” said Louise Aronson, a geriatrician and author of “Elderhood: Redefining Aging, Transforming Medicine, Reimagining Life.”
“There’s almost a superstition where if I don’t discuss it, it won’t happen. Or discussing it is depressing. A lot of times older people will say to me, ‘I’ve been trying to have this planning you talk about, but my kids don’t want to discuss it.’ So the parents are bringing up something relevant to their life, and the kids are saying, ‘I can’t deal with it.’ They’re making it about them, not their parents. And that actually leads to huge problems.”
The vocabulary of loss and grief, which can bloom into eloquence after someone’s death, is of no use in the weeks or months leading up to it. Instead, there is language suited to war: the battle against illness or refusal to quit, the heroic struggle whose linguistic alternative is failure or giving up.
How do we want to spend our last days, and what do we want of our loved ones?
For Jonas Mekas, who was weakened by a blood disorder, the last days were busy. He was preparing three books for publication, and working on several films and videos; he was organizing boxes and designating where papers should go after he died — some to a municipal library in Lithuania, some to Mana Contemporary in Jersey City. When friends visited, he apologized for his weakened condition.
“He definitely felt there was some sort of mystery that was waiting for him, but he was hesitant always to go any further in describing it,” Sebastian Mekas said.
Jonas had long surrounded himself with younger people, describing himself as a “vampire” feeding on their energy. In the hospital on his 96th birthday, Christmas Eve, his friend Benn Northover played him a recording of Lutheran hymns. Jonas seemed to drift into sleep.
Then he said, “I have realized that I am not immortal,” Mr. Northover remembered.
His friend asked how he felt about that.
“I accept it,” Jonas said. “I am preparing myself. They need my help.”
“Who?”
“My angels,” Jonas said. “I’m negotiating with my angels.”
He said the angels had a lot of work for him where he was going, even more than he had done in life. “There is fine,” he said. “It’s here that needs help.”
For Ping Wong and her daughter, Elaine Gin, 66, the end came with a suddenness that was both predictable and too much. Ping had lived in a subsidized apartment near Gramercy Park at the start of the series — rent: around $200 a month — but moved to a nursing home near her daughter in southern New Jersey in 2016 as she developed dementia.
When I visited in early November, she was upbeat and lucid, with occasional holes in her memory.
“I thought you retired,” she said, “because so long a period I don’t see you.” That was dementia.
The stroke, when it came on Nov. 12, seemed a temporary setback, maybe three days in the hospital. But when she left for rehab nearly a week later, she was agitated, unable to feed herself or use most of the muscles on one side of her body.
Ping had always talked about death in practical terms, about not leaving financial obligations for her family.
“The most important thing is money for your last day,” she said several times over the years. She knew a woman who said she didn’t care about a funeral, let them throw her in the garbage when she was gone. For Ping, this made dying too much like living, unsettled and full of anxiety. A prepaid funeral, on the other hand, was a debt settled, forever.
In late November, she stopped eating or drinking Ensure, a nutrition shake. When her daughter encouraged her to eat, Ping pushed her away and gestured to go home. Ping had always had a rigid, critical side, which Ms. Gin had tried to soften. Now that edge was turned on her.
“I was kind of mad because I know she’s rejecting everything,” Ms. Gin said. “She refused to eat, she refused to let people help her. So I had really no idea how to help her. I think she wanted to go.”
There was much they had not discussed, and now it was too late. Did Ping believe in an afterlife? Ms. Gin thought so, but they had never had that conversation.
“In Chinese culture, everybody has a way to go in their life,” Ms. Gin said. “Everybody has their own pavement. You walk the way you’re supposed to walk. So I did say to her, ‘I don’t think this is your time yet.’ I know she can hear me, but she don’t respond.”
Ms. Gin was torn: if her mother survived, maybe she could rebuild the strength she had before the stroke. But she did not want her to linger indefinitely in a diminished state.
Ping began her last day, Nov. 29, in hospice care, sedated with morphine so that she was not in pain. The end, Ms. Gin said, was a relief. “It was what she wanted, and she got what she wanted.”
Helen Moses and her daughter, Zoe Gussoff, never discussed how Helen wanted to live her last days for a simple reason: Ms. Gussoff did not accept that her mother would ever die.
A few years back, the two had met with Rabbi Simon Hirschhorn, the director of religious services at the Hebrew Home at Riverdale, where Helen lived for the last 11 years.
Helen asked the Rabbi to please tell Zoe that her mother was not going to live forever.
“And I said, ‘No way,’” Ms. Gussoff remembered recently. “She’s going to be here forever. I said, ‘I can’t talk about this, I’m sorry.’ And she said, ‘Zoe, grow up.’”
Ms. Gussoff added, “It’s very hard for me.”
Helen entered The Times series loud and brassy and in love with a man named Howie Zeimer, who lived down the hall at the Hebrew Home. The Times articles had made her something of a celebrity in the home.
“Everybody knows me,” she often said. “I don’t know them, but they know me.”
It had been an act of courage to let herself love Howie, knowing that they would not be able to do so for long, and that one would inevitably watch the other decline.
In 2019, death moved more prominently into view. Helen began hospice care last January after her kidneys failed, but then she bounced back, noticeably more sedate than in past years. On one visit she did not recognize me at first. Then she said I needed a haircut.
Another time, a surprise: Helen was wearing three wedding rings. For five years she had talked about wanting to marry Howie, but now, not a word about it.
Helen, I asked, does that mean you are married?
She smiled for the first time and held out her hand. “Correct, sir,” she said.
Close, anyway: commitment ceremony, just a few relatives. She wore a pink dress with pearls around her neck and an oxygen hose threaded under her nose.
By fall, though, as her strength declined, Howie was not often in her life, and when she closed her eyes and stopped talking in early December, Ms. Gussoff was out of town, no closer to accepting her mother’s mortality. There was a last phone call, with a member of the nursing home holding the phone to Helen, who was unresponsive until the last minute. “She pulled the phone away and somehow said, ‘Zoe, I love you,’” Ms. Gussoff said. “That’s what I’ll always remember.”
On Dec. 9, she died as she had spent the previous days, giving no sign that she heard what anyone said to her. Ms. Gussoff was left on her own to figure out how to go on.
“I don’t wish there was any guidance,” she said, weeks later. “I just wish I had more time with my mother. I’m taking it really hard. I didn’t want my mother to suffer. But I thought she was going to bounce back like she always did. When they started giving her morphine, I knew that my wishes were not going to come true. But I didn’t want to admit to it.”
Which leaves Ruth Willig, in the assisted-living building in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, that she has never quite accepted as home. She emails her four children every morning before breakfast to let them know she’s still alive. It’s the kind of nuisance she complains about but loves.
“I’ve changed in a year,” she said. “Have you seen it? Sometimes I say I’m losing it. I’m not really losing it, but a little bit.”
She learned to use FaceTime on her phone to have video conversations with her great-granddaughter, who turned 2 last spring. She likes doing The Times’s mini crossword puzzle.
When it comes to preparing for the end, Ruth and her family are better positioned than most. Her oldest daughter, Judy, runs a senior center and elder-services agency, where death is the one constant in nearly every relationship.
But as with the other elders, Ruth’s 90s have been marked by a tension between autonomy and safety — everybody has a different idea about what Ruth can do safely, and how much risk is too much. “Judy, she thinks she knows what’s best for me,” Ruth said. “Sometimes I disagree.” She laughed. “I’m stubborn. S-T-U-B-B-O-R-N.”
This year that tension played out on the annual family vacation at the Jersey Shore. Ruth felt she could manage the stairs in the rental house. Her daughters felt it was unsafe. At the end of the week she said she did not want to go back next year. Her children made her record it, saying she’d said the same thing the previous year, but then forgotten it.
“I feel sorry for them, my girls, because I give them a hard time,” Ruth said. “They’re happy to have me. I’m happy I have them. I’m very blessed.”
It is this bond that makes death harder for Ruth to face, not for herself, but for her children. Dying will be her last act as a parent; her last request, that her children let her go.
Judy Willig sees this challenge all the time. But she said it was easier to help her staff talk about mortality with clients than to do so with her own family. Yet they manage, she said.
“I’m going to be very sad,” she said. “I’m very close to my mom. But we also talk about it, a lot. We don’t sit down and say, O.K., let’s talk about death today. But it certainly comes up in our conversation. When we go to make a doctor’s appointment and they say, ‘Come back six months from now,’ she’ll say, ‘I might not be here.’ There’s the constant reality of it. She’s very reality-based in that.”
In her assisted-living building, Ruth, too, sees neighbors dying or deteriorating, the regular appearance of stretchers coming and going. When she watches a neighbor struggle to get to kidney dialysis treatments, she said, “I think to myself, if that were me, I would not go.”
Her children, she said, know that she feels that way. “They agree with that, I think. When death comes, death comes. I don’t discuss it with them.”
She added, “They don’t want to see me go, but they’re very devoted to me, and I appreciate that they are. But they know the end is going to come. They’re not stupid.”
As for Jonas Mekas, his film for Verdi’s Requiem premiered at the Shed in Hudson Yards in November, first with a recording of the Mass, then with a live 100-piece orchestra and 80-member chorus. A new book, “I Seem to Live: New York Diaries 1950-1969, Vol. 1,” is due out next month. A second volume plus two other books are also ready to go.
The angels, apparently, are keeping him busy.