Harry and Meghan, Going Their Own Way
To the Editor:
Re “Going Rogue: Prince Harry and Meghan Surprised the Palace” (news article, Jan. 10):
The real story here is that two young people who are constantly in the public eye and relentlessly followed and photographed by the media simply want to lead normal lives while contributing to improving the human condition in a meaningful way.
Instead, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle’s decision to live their lives in a way that works for them is being portrayed as some sort of a royal imbroglio and as a selfish act intended to destroy the House of Windsor.
I have no fear that the British royal family is in jeopardy due to this couple’s decision, and even if it were, does that really deserve to be covered as a catastrophic and earth-shattering global event?
Alan Safron
Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
To the Editor:
I am British and do not share the interest shown by many Americans in the British royals. I suppose it is a reflection of the amount of that interest, but it is dismaying to see The New York Times, of all papers, devoting pages (let alone a major editorial!) to the coverage of these piffling nonentities living in the most expensive social housing in history.
They are hyperprivileged, very wealthy people who contribute nothing but “celebrity” to society — Kardashians with titles. Why their doings should be considered of concern to the educated, informed readers of your newspaper baffles me completely.
Michael Gorman
Chicago
To the Editor:
I say, good for them! They are putting their family first, which is what everyone should do. Prince William and Kate have things in hand and will do an excellent job in their roles. I believe that Harry is showing a great deal of strength, insight and love in this situation. He is recognizing the pitfalls of what is happening with Meghan as the same ones faced by his mother. I cannot blame him for wanting to protect her and his son.
He is so much like his mum, and she would be so very proud of him. I know I am.
Tammie Cole

To the Editor:
As a child of immigrants from a country ravaged by the colonization of Britain and as a grandchild of a refugees displaced by Partition, I have never had much sympathy for the British monarchy.
I would like to think that Meghan and Harry’s actions will serve as a catalyst to the inevitable changes occurring to the British monarchy, but, in reality, the only way they can have any kind of impact on this system is if they choose to remove themselves entirely from the royal system, refuse their inheritance and drop their royal titles. Instead of taking this approach, Meghan and Harry are taking the easier approach of putting some distance between themselves and the royal family, but still continue to profit off their image as a royal.
Leela Mukherjee
Cupertino, Calif.
To the Editor:
Re “A Couple’s Declaration of Independence From the Tabloids” (news article, Jan. 10):
The tabloid photographer Arthur Edwards’s remark that Princess Diana’s death was more than two decades ago and that Harry should move on shows his total lack of understanding of how traumatic the death of a mother can be for a 12-year-old. One doesn’t simply move on; you carry it with you.
Harry has made no secret of how the death of his mother in a car accident after being chased by members of the British tabloid press has affected his emotional growth. Good for the Sussexes! May they have a long and happy marriage on their own terms.
Diane Saslow
Stratford, Conn.