What’s on TV Thursday: ‘Breakthrough’ and ‘Surviving R. Kelly Part II’
BREAKTHROUGH (2019) 8 p.m. on HBO. A tragedy happens on ice — and an apparent miracle happens off it — in this faith-based drama from the TV veteran Roxann Dawson. The screenplay is based on an actual 2015 incident in which John Smith, a Missouri teenager, fell through the frozen surface of a lake and remained submerged long enough for his heart to stop. It started pumping blood again after he was brought to a hospital — but reportedly only when his mother audibly prayed for him. That event and the community’s subsequent push to aid in John’s recovery are at the center of this movie, which follows John (Marcel Ruiz), his mother (Chrissy Metz) and father (Josh Lucas) and a young pastor (Topher Grace). The film “tells the story of John’s miraculous ordeal with an unassuming simplicity, focusing on the harrowing details of the case without an overreliance on proselytization,” Bilge Ebiri wrote in his review for The New York Times. Though faith is ever-present, he added, “the film also wisely dedicates plenty of screen time to the emergency workers and doctors struggling to bring the boy back to life. Here, religion is not in contention with medicine, but seems to work in tandem with it.”
DEPUTY 9 p.m. on Fox. The director David Ayer and the screenwriter Will Beall created this new series, which mixes police procedural and western genres. Its premiere introduces a Los Angeles officer (Stephen Dorff) who reluctantly assumes the mantle of sheriff after the sudden death of his superior. (He’s the kind of live wire who says things like “policy and procedure be damned.”)
SURVIVING R. KELLY PART II: THE RECKONING 9 p.m. on Lifetime. A year ago, Lifetime aired “Surviving R. Kelly,” a documentary series that dove into allegations of sexual abuse against the R&B singer R. Kelly. (Kelly has since been criminally charged in multiple jurisdictions on allegations that he sexually abused minors.) This five-part follow-up continues that dive, looking at Kelly’s legal troubles and how his accusers’ lives have been affected since they spoke out.
RAISE HELL: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF MOLLY IVINS (2019) Stream on Hulu; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. There’s a clip in this documentary, about the Texas-based columnist Molly Ivins famous for wittily skewering politicians, in which she tells a story about writing for this newspaper. She had described a man as having “a beer gut that belongs in the Smithsonian”; that was changed, she laments, to “protuberant abdomen.” Thankfully, Ivins’s idiosyncratic tone is intact in “Raise Hell,” which uses interviews and archival footage to revisit her life and work. (She died in 2007.) “Whether you chuckle or snort will likely depend on your political persuasion, though it’s clear that the filmmakers aren’t aiming to seduce conservatives,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The Times. “This is a loving, at times fawning portrait aimed at the Ivins faithful — her ‘beloveds,’ as she addressed her readers — who read her syndicated columns and best-selling books or showed up for her speeches.”