12 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
BLUE HAWAII at Baby’s All Right (Jan. 11, 7:30 p.m.). Breakups have long been prime songwriting fodder, but things can get complicated when the parties in question are also creative collaborators. Such is the story of this electronic duo of Raphaelle Standell and Alexander Kerby: After putting their romantic relationship to bed with the icy synth pop of 2013’s “Untogether,” they spent some time apart before reconvening and sonically recalibrating on 2017’s “Tenderness.” Opting to fill in the emotional and sonic space of their earlier work, the pair looked to the body-friendly rhythms of disco and house music. Their latest album, last year’s “Open Reduction Internal Fixation,” extended their foray into dance music, and will make for an energetic performance at this spot in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
718-599-5800, babysallright.com
LITTLE BIG TOWN at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 16, 8 p.m.). For more than a decade, this Nashville-based quartet has been a staple of the country radio diet. Dense, liberally applied harmonies are their time-tested recipe; as the situation demands, the group’s four-part vocal theatrics can add firepower to country stompers, like their 2005 single “Boondocks,” or bring gravitas to emotional ballads, like their Taylor Swift-penned song “Better Man,” from 2016. In Midtown on Thursday, the group will celebrate the release of their ninth studio album, “Nightfall,” and kick off a six-month tour that includes back-to-back shows at the Apollo on Jan. 17 and 18.
212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
SECRET PLANET 2020 at Drom (Jan. 11, 7 p.m.). An offshoot of the massive annual gathering of the nonprofit Association for Performing Arts Professionals, this showcase presented by the eclectic world music labels Electric Cowbell and Barbès Records celebrates its 10th anniversary on Saturday at this East Village performance space. As in years past, the lineup highlights musicians representing diverse geographies, from Siberia to Palestine to Haiti. Performers include the Dap-Kings saxophonist Cochemea Gastelum and the multilingual Haitian hip-hop artist Vox Sambou. Those with the stamina for late-night outings are sure to be rewarded by a 1 a.m. set from the evening’s headliner, Los Cumpleaños, a four piece who offer a psychedelic take on cumbia.
dromnyc.com

[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
SISTER NANCY at Elsewhere (Jan. 16, 8 p.m.). Though her own success was stunted by an exploitative record contract that denied her royalty payments for more than 30 years, this trailblazing performer has inspired some of the biggest stars in rap: Jay-Z, Kanye West and Lauryn Hill have all sampled or otherwise interpolated her song “Bam Bam.” Widely recognized as the first female D.J. to emerge from the boys’ club of the dancehall scene in Jamaica, Sister Nancy cut her first and only solo album (to which “Bam Bam” was a last-minute addition) in 1982 and performed with some of that country’s biggest sound systems before ultimately immigrating to the United States. At Elsewhere, expect to hear “Bam Bam” and her other hits, “One Two” and “Transport Connection.”
elsewherebrooklyn.com

WALE at Brooklyn Steel (Jan. 15, 9 p.m.). While many of rap’s hub cities are known for a distinctive regional style, Washington is less amenable to such pigeonholing. One of its longest-standing ambassadors, Wale, born Olubowale Victor Akintimehin, embodies the range of the scene he represents. Throughout a decade-plus career, his work has taken a number of shapes, from the charming nerdiness of his Seinfeld-inspired “Mixtape About Nothing” to the Lothario leanings of his stint with Rick Ross’s Maybach Music Group. Wale hopscotches through sounds, but one of his greatest strengths is rap balladry, of which there is an ample supply on his latest album, October’s “Wow … That’s Crazy.”
888-929-7849, bowerypresents.com
KRYSTLE WARREN at Rough Trade NYC (Jan. 10, 9 p.m.). This Kansas City, Mo., native’s heartland roots shine through in her songs, which fuse a variety of American musical modes, including blues, country and R&B. The gospel tradition, in particular, informs one highlight from Warren’s most recent album, 2017’s “Three the Hard Way”: On “Red Clay,” she deploys spiritual appeals and rich call-and-response harmonies to reflect on the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921. Despite the clear inspiration she takes from American history and culture, Warren is an expat currently based in Paris. The influence of her adopted home is similarly evident on the record, as with “If Memory Serves Me Well,” on which she sings in French.
roughtradenyc.com
OLIVIA HORN
SCOTT COLLEY at the Village Vanguard (through Jan. 12, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). There’s a sense of deep assurance in Colley’s bass playing, but also a kind of hyper-vigilance. He rarely drags the beat or smears his notes. He’s near the top of the heap among contemporary jazz bassists, for reasons you can clearly hear on “How to Get There,” a fine duet album that he and the saxophonist Benjamin Koppel put out last year. But this week at the Vanguard, Colley will helm a full quartet, featuring what could only be called a dream team: Ralph Alessi on trumpet, Craig Taborn on piano and Nasheet Waits on drums.
212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com
PHILLY REUNION at the Blue Note (through Jan. 12, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). In the late 1980s, Philadelphia’s High School for Creative and Performing Arts was a motherlode of rising jazz talent: The guitarist Kurt Rosenwinkel, the bassist Christian McBride and the organist Joey DeFrancesco all graduated within a couple years of each other, then stepped right into illustrious careers that would help define the direction of jazz. Each went his own stylistic way, but here they will convene — along with the drummer John Roberts, known as Lil’ John, another Philadelphia native of their generation — mining common ground through common memory.
212-475-8592, bluenote.net
JEN SHYU at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 11, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Few performers have established as singular or as expansive a practice as Shyu. You could call her a vocalist, multi-instrumentalist and movement artist, but it might be better just to say that she tells stories in multiple dimensions. Her long-form works fuse folklore with personal narrative, and put rigorous compositions together with fierce improvisation and, sometimes, open dialogue with the audience. Here she will perform her newest work, “Zero Grasses,” a one-woman show created in collaboration with the Romanian theater director Alexandru Mihail.
646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
CHES SMITH at the Stone (Jan. 14-18, 8:30 p.m.). Spend more than a few days bopping around New York’s improvised-music scene, and you’ll surely come across Ches Smith. He’s among the most-called-upon drummer and percussionist on the avant-garde today. Seeing him lead his own projects is uncommon, so this residency at the Stone is something of a turning of the tables. And they’ll be spun in a lot of directions: He appears with a different group each night. Of particular note are Tuesday’s show — featuring the pianist Craig Taborn, the violinist Mat Maneri and a special guest to be named on guitar — and Thursday’s program, titled “Drums and Songs,” for which Smith and the bassist Nick Dunston will be joined by a number of vocalists and players of the tanbou, a Haitian drum.
thestonenyc.com
WINTER JAZZFEST at various locations (through Jan. 18). Over the past 16 years, Winter Jazzfest has established itself as New York’s flagship jazz festival, a gathering of eminent stars and an opportunity for new talents to break through. This year, it is bigger than ever, with performances from over 100 artists across 11 nights and, for the first time, concerts in Brooklyn as well as Manhattan. A highlight of those outer-borough shows comes on Saturday night, at the Sultan Room in Bushwick, where the clangorous experimental blues guitarist and vocalist James Blood Ulmer will revisit “Odyssey,” his 1984 cult classic, with the band from that album, featuring Charlie Burnham on violin and Warren Benbow on drums; the trio Harriet Tubman will join them on the bill. But for die-hards, the main event remains the renowned Manhattan Marathon, happening on Friday and Saturday nights at various clubs scattered around Lower Manhattan.
winterjazzfest.com
LIZZ WRIGHT at Jazz Standard (Jan. 10-11, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Wright, a vocalist, has an immense and luxurious instrument; with just a dab or a whisper, she can make a lyric feel all-encompassing, like an ultimate truth. She’s a thoughtful, often moving songwriter and an even more remarkable interpreter of songs: On her latest album, “Grace” (2017), Wright drifts leisurely through a potpourri of songs related to the American South, exhibiting self-assurance and trust over a vast patchwork of material. She appears at Jazz Standard with a modified version of the band in which she placed her faith on that album: Chris Bruce and Adam Levy on guitars, Kenny Banks Sr. and David Cook on piano and organ, Ben Zwerin on bass, and Jack DeBoe on drums. The shows have sold out, but a standby line will form at the box office at 5:30 on both nights.
212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO