‘BoJack Horseman’ Ended With a Necessary Reckoning
This essay contains spoilers for the final season of “BoJack Horseman.”
“I haven’t done anything. Since I got out of rehab, I have been on my best behavior,” proclaims BoJack Horseman (voiced by Will Arnett), the eponymous protagonist of the animated Netflix show. In the second half of the sixth and final season, BoJack, a washed-up 1990s sitcom star and anthropomorphic horse, has found out reporters are planning to publish a damning exposé of his pre-rehab behavior.
“They can’t get me on old [expletive],” he pleads. “I’m a different person now.”
But they do “get him.” After BoJack gives a Prince Andrew-like interview, he’s ostracized and falls off the wagon, almost drunkenly drowning to death in the pool of his former home. He’s convicted and sentenced to 14 months in prison for breaking and entering, although, he admits, “it was kind of for everything” — including seducing and almost sleeping with an ex-girlfriend’s 17-year-old daughter and providing a former co-star with the heroin on which she fatally overdoses.
Male antihero TV characters like BoJack — the Don Drapers and Walter Whites who dominated the late 2000s and early 2010s — are usually designed to be empathetic. We’re supposed to root for them despite their wrongdoings, and cheer when they ride off into the proverbial sunset as some karmic justice restores the brokenness they’ve left behind.
Since it began, “BoJack Horseman” has offered an alternative, forcing viewers to repeatedly see the damage its destructive protagonist inflicts, while complicating any empathy they might feel for him. This unique approach arrived at its logical conclusion with the final installment of episodes released Friday, punishing BoJack while also laying out a path for his redemption.
If this remains a rare outcome on TV, it is even rarer in real life — and it’s likely to resonate with viewers wrestling with what a transgressor’s path to atonement might look like.
In crucial ways, BoJack bears resemblance to Jon Hamm’s Don Draper on “Mad Men” — both characters treat women horribly, using their professional power to get what they want without any serious self-reflection. Yet unlike Don, BoJack eventually tries to better himself, address his drug addiction and repair the relationships he has broken.
At first, there seems to be hope for a neat ending for BoJack. But that would have betrayed the show’s underlying message that actions have consequences — and that the acknowledgment of this fact is central to one’s personal penance and evolution.
When a bowl or teapot falls and shatters, most people might throw it away, considering the object broken, ruined and without value. The Japanese art of “kintsugi” takes a radically different approach, using precious metal to bring the broken piece back together. “BoJack Horseman” does something similar.
Take, for example, BoJack’s confidant and former biographer, Diane Nguyen (Alison Brie). Though thriving in her personal life, she’s struggling to write her promised collection of essays. As she tries to focus, she’s interrupted by a surreal black-and-white mélange of key contributors to her emotional wreckage, including her father and BoJack. A figment of her ex-husband, Mr. Peanutbutter (Paul F. Tomkins), appears in her mental chaos, offering tidbits of insight. “Cracks in an object are part of its history,” he says.
BoJack is also trying to piece himself back together. After years of blaming his misdeeds on childhood trauma, he at last accepts responsibility for his behavior. He emerges sober, thinking himself to be a new man, and mostly escapes professional punishment. The movie he filmed right before entering prison has positive buzz. The industry has forgotten BoJack’s indiscretions, allowing him to walk entertainment’s dollar-paved road to rebirth.
“People have short memories,” says Princess Carolyn (Amy Sedaris), his agent and friend. “It’s the best and worst thing about people.”
But a stint in rehab cannot erase the hurt he’s caused the people in his life, just as similar periods out of the spotlight have not repaired the damage inflicted by real-life men who resurface in attempted comebacks.
Princess Carolyn declines to continue representing BoJack. Hollyhock (Aparna Nancherla), his half sister, sends him a letter, the contents of which are never revealed to the viewer but which clearly marks her permanent exit from his life. And Diane, whom BoJack has unfairly imagined to be his savior, wishes him well but implies their friendship has reached its end.
This bittersweet ending shows how within the last decade, writers and audiences have come to think differently about so-called “difficult men.”
Many people admired Don Draper — whom Jon Hamm himself called “a pretty dismal, despicable guy” — despite seven seasons of narcissism, callous womanizing and a layered, platonic relationship with his one-time secretary Peggy Olson that often borders on the emotionally manipulative and abusive. By the show’s end, Don appears to remain on good terms with some of those he wronged, and is set to look after his children in the eventual absence of his dying ex-wife, Betty.
The series ends with him, ostensibly at peace, dreaming up the 1971 landmark Coca-Cola ad, “I’d Like to Buy the World a Coke.”
Viewers also rooted for Walter White on “Breaking Bad,” despite his deceitful and exploitative actions toward others, most notably Jesse Pinkman, his partner in crime, and Skyler White, his wife. Skyler (Anna Gunn) was the only character who truly challenged Walter’s behavior: Ms. Gunn herself received hate mail as a result. The backlash was so strong that the actress penned a New York Times Op-Ed in 2013, observing that “male characters don’t seem to inspire this kind of public venting and vitriol,” which is instead reserved for TV wives like Skyler and Betty Draper on “Mad Men."
We’re primed to extend empathy to the reckless antihero, rather than the characters representing the moral considerations that probably should hold them in check. In its final episode, “Breaking Bad” valorizes Walter, a man who once coldly watched a woman die of an overdose without doing anything to save her, among many other horrific deeds. He gets to go out on his own terms after magnificently mowing down a conglomerate of neo-Nazis, perhaps the only characters who outrank him in insidiousness.
“BoJack Horseman” is uniquely out of step here. Its creator, Raphael Bob-Waksberg, doesn’t want to give his protagonist such a satisfying ending. Mr. Bob-Waksberg has said he based Season 5 of the show on the actor Mel Gibson, whose recorded racist rants failed to end his career. And while the showrunner said he found himself “unwilling to forgive” the actor, he admitted to believing “in the power of forgiveness, generally.” This ambivalence speaks directly to the tone of the final season of “BoJack.”
As a viewer, it would have felt preposterous for BoJack to be readily accepted back into the fold by the people who cared about him the most. It’s fitting that the show forces him to reckon with his past in a way characters like Don Draper and Walter White never did. The series’ arc matches the public’s growing concerns about how to measure and take part in accountability across all walks of life — the #MeToo abusers and manipulators, yes, but also those who may have, for instance, said or done racist or homophobic things in their past.
By the end, BoJack comes to understand that, rather than disappear or drag him down, his past wrongs linger like precious “kintsugi” cracks in his reformed self, serving as indelible reminders of where brokenness once was — and to illuminate who he is now as a whole.
“Life’s a [expletive] and then you die,” BoJack tells Diane in the final scene. They are sitting on a maroon-shingled roof, having what they both recognize is likely to be their last interaction with one another. But she disagrees. Instead, she urges him to see the cracks of his past as fortification for the future, offering a correction he seems to accept. “Life’s a [expletive],” she says, “and you keep living.”