And the Winners Are, Part 2: The ‘Alphabetrivia’ Contest
SPECIAL COLUMN — This turned out to be harder than we thought.
The contest consisted of 36 trivia questions, in which each answer was a single letter of the alphabet. A letter could answer zero, one, two or more questions. When everything was done, you were asked to take the letters that answered exactly two questions, put them in alphabetical order and email them to us.
We received only 316 entries, of which 143 were correct — ADEPT.
Incorrect answers included ADOPT (nine times), HINT (three times), HI, ADIOS, AEIOU, FOXY, BIOPSY, AHOTVW and assorted other strings.
The hardest question seemed to be no. 26, which asked for the first letter of the first clue in the world’s first crossword puzzle book. While that book, published by Simon & Schuster in 1924, doesn’t appear to be online, the first puzzle in it is. A search for “Simon & Schuster” + “1924” + “series 1” turns up a reprint of the puzzle among the first few hits. The clue for 1-Across was “Pronoun” (for HE). The clue for 1-Down, by the way, was “Exclamation” (for HO). They really knew how to make crosswords in those days!
The winner of “Alphabetrivia,” selected at random from among the correct solvers, is Bessie Lewis, of Baltimore, Md., who said it took her about two hours over several nights of “Googling and pondering.” She will receive a check for $1,000.
Twenty-five runners-up will each receive copies of the book “Duh! 100 Bar Trivia Questions You Should Know” by Christopher D. Short (Adams Media). They are:
Kudos to Stella Zawistowski for crafting the contest questions. And a tip of the hat to Games magazine, which originated “Alphabetrivia” as a contest back in the day.
Herewith the answers:
1. The most common letter among elemental symbols of the periodic table — R (19 times)
2. A homophone of the surname of approximately 18,000 Americans in the most recent census — O (for the name “Oh”)
3. The number shown — E
4. The M.P.A.A. rating of the highest-grossing movie in the U.S. from June 21 through July 1, 2019 — G (“Toy Story 4”)
5. The name of a fictional character played by Ben Whishaw, Desmond Llewelyn and John Cleese — Q
6. The only letter in Scrabble that has a unique point value — K (5 points)
7. A word unknown to the protagonist of Ayn Rand’s novella “Anthem” until the penultimate chapter — I (the protagonist refers to himself as “we” until chapter 10 of 11)
8. The pitch of the note that is an appoggiatura — F
9. The Czech word for “of” — Z
10. The first letter of every word in the title of a television show that debuted on Dec. 18, 1956 — T (“To Tell the Truth”)
11. The video game pictured — N
12. The sixth track on Kendrick Lamar’s third album — “U”
13. A New York City subway line that was revived in 2012 after an 18-year hiatus — H
14. The only letter that is always pronounced whenever it appears in an English word, according to Merriam-Webster — V
15. A magazine whose premier issue’s cover contained a photo of the actress Kate Winslet, the magazine’s name and nothing else — T (first issue in August 2004)
16. A stock-ticker symbol once used by an automaker and currently used by a Big Four bank — C (Chrysler, Citigroup)
17. The letter in the American Sign Language alphabet that most closely resembles a Hawaiian hand gesture expressing solidarity or agreement — Y
18. The most common middle initial of U.S. presidents — H (William Henry Harrison, William Howard Taft, George Herbert Walker Bush, Barack Hussein Obama) (note: solutions that treated the “Woodrow” of Thomas Woodrow Wilson as the 28th president’s middle name, creating a tie between H and W as the most common middle initial, were also counted correct)
19. The letter in the logo of the automobile pictured — H (Honda)
20. A name suffix meaning “stream” in Icelandic — A
21. The English name of the film known in its home country as “Eine Stadt sucht einen Mörder” — “M”
22. The letter on a switch that turns coins into bricks, and vice versa, in the Super Mario Bros. video-game franchise — P
23. The number of the first Super Bowl to include a wild-card team — X
24. The film pictured — “Q”
25. A woman’s bra cup size, if her bust circumference is 31 inches and her underbust circumference is 30 inches — A
26. The first letter of the first clue in Puzzle No. 1 in the world’s first crossword book — P (“Pronoun”)
27. The Cirque du Soleil show that sells “wet seat” tickets for those seated in the first three rows — O
28. The Gemological Institute of America’s grade for a completely colorless diamond — D
29. The symbol on the coat of arms of the officer’s school of the German defense ministry — S
30. The letter on the right chest of a redhead in the “Gangnam Style” music video — B
31. The last letter in the name of what this flag represents — O (Esperanto)
32. The shape of the cattle brand used by the Texas rancher “Shanghai” Pierce — D
33. The single letter appearing on an Illinois vanity license plate for an ex-governor of that state, starting in 1999 — E
34. The foreign currency symbol of Guatemala — Q
35. A homophone of the French translation of the Japanese word shown — L (the characters are Japanese for “she,” which translates to “elle” in French)
36. The shape formed by palm trees under which $350,000 is hidden in the film “It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World” — W
Finally, a comment from one of the winners, Avery Monsen: “I couldn’t find ‘The Cross Word Puzzle Book’ (1924) anywhere online, so I was forced to search for the 1974 reprint on Amazon, leaving voice mail messages for every seller that had a used copy. Eventually, one called me back. I wonder how many other people used this strategy! Explaining my predicament to strangers over the phone while at my in-laws’ house over Christmas was hilarious for everyone.”
[Read about the winners of the Super Mega Crossword Contest in “And the Winners Are, Part 1”]