What to Cook This Week
Good morning. I was in Las Vegas this week, speed-talking my way around a convention floor as if I were doing research for a millennial rewrite of “Glengarry Glen Ross.” It was exhausting and strange, everyone was smoking, and all I really wanted to do was to be standing at my stove at home, tending to a Béarnaise sauce in advance of pan-roasting a steak and some mock frites to go with it, a thatch of watercress, a glass of wine. So maybe that could be dinner tonight. Please?
On Monday, how about this easy, earthy lentil soup (above) from Melissa Clark, with a little yogurt stirred in at the end, some browned leeks, a few croutons?
On Tuesday, Alison Roman’s recipe for oven-roasted whole fish with soy and citrus could be a joy, especially if you can lay hands on a bright-eyed specimen at the market — in my market, hopefully, that would be a fat porgy of the sort we call a pork chop.
For Wednesday, perhaps, you could make chicken piccata or, for that matter, swordfish piccata or seitan piccata. Those lemons and capers bring sunlight into winter darkness, every time.
For a Thursday night meal, Julia Moskin’s big salad with grains, endlessly adaptable, always terrific.
And then you can slide into the weekend with a big platter of Yewande Komolafe’s citrus-glazed pork chops with gingery bok choy.
Something like 20,000 more recipes are waiting for you on NYT Cooking. Yes, you need a subscription to access them. In return for taking one out, though, we’ll give you more than just the recipes. There’s also a recipe box in which to collect your favorites, along with tools to organize them and permission to leave notes on them for yourself or fellow members of our community. You can rate the recipes you’ve cooked and send them to other people. You can send yourself grocery lists. You can even save recipes to your recipe box that come from other places on the internet: here’s how.
We talk about our work on our Facebook page, and there’s a community group there you may wish to join, devoted to cooking and NYT Cooking alike. You can find us on Instagram, too, and of course we’re on Twitter as all journalists must be. Naturally we’re on YouTube as well. Come visit and Alison’ll show you how to make pasta.
Do write if something goes wrong along the way: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Someone will get back to you. Or you can escalate matters and write to me. I read every message sent.
Now, see what you think of this podcast from Gastropod, on one solution to invasive species across the globe: Eat them.
It has precious little to do with chocolate or flan, but I like this Emily Pérez poem in The Missouri Review, “Ten Years Later My Husband Walks Out of the Woods.”
Important Instagram content: @kookslams; @thequalifiedcaptain; @tejalxrao.
Finally, see what you think of this excerpt from Isabel Allende’s new novel, “A Long Petal of the Sea.” Allende writes exquisite sentences: “The most outstanding pianist among Professor Dalmau’s students was Roser Bruguera, a young girl from the village of Santa Fe de Segarra who, had it not been for the generous intervention of Santiago Guzman, would have shepherded goats all her life.” Read a few of them and maybe, like me, you’ll want to read them all. Cook something afterward, and I’ll be back tomorrow with more.