Please Stop Calling Bernie Sanders a Populist
Bernie Sanders is surging. What has changed? It cannot be the candidate, because, rightly or wrongly, voters perceive Mr. Sanders as always being his same sincere, authentic self. One thought is that, given how the Democratic field has narrowed, he might in the end be the man to beat President Trump, since he appeals to many of the angry citizens who proved decisive in 2016 — an anti-establishment message vigorously pushed by the Sanders campaign itself.
The obvious implication is that Mr. Sanders and Mr. Trump must have things in common: It has been claimed that both are populists, both divisive, both ready to break norms, both attack the news media, both have cult followings — the list could go on. Today, this false equation is being pushed by pundits on the right and, until now less loudly, by liberal centrists. But it is high time to retire the horseshoe theory according to which extremes of right and left must always meet somewhere, such that the only salvation from “political sociopaths” lies with the center.
Conventional wisdom has it that populists criticize elites. In recent years, with the rise of populists around the globe, there is also the suspicion that they pose a systematic threat to liberal democracy as such. But it is wrong simply to equate populism with being “anti-establishment.” After all, any old civics textbook will say that keeping a critical eye on the powerful is actually a hallmark of being a good democratic citizen, and nothing particularly populist.
Figures like Mr. Trump, Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary or President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey do indeed criticize elites. But more important, they claim that they, and only they, represent what they often call the “real people.” As a result, they do not just attack other contenders for power as fundamentally illegitimate, they also suggest that all citizens who do not support them are not properly part of the people at all. Mr. Trump does not simply try to refute opposition to his policies, as any normal politician would do; he attacks his critics as “un-American.” Mr. Erdogan says about himself and his political party, “we are the people.” Right-wing populists always wage culture wars with a view to excluding some citizens, symbolically or through actual disenfranchisement. While they incessantly talk about unifying the people, dividing them is actually the very basis of their political business model.
But is the left not guilty of the same sin? After all, in the eyes of his critics, Mr. Sanders does not just criticize corruption, but demonize what for years he has consistently been calling the “billionaire class.” Is that not also, centrists complain, demagogy, such that a discrete group of people is blamed for all ills in society?
The differences are subtle, but essential. There is nothing wrong as such with a politician or political movement naming — and mobilizing against — powerful adversaries. Democracy is not about consensus or bipartisanship or making us all get along. Its genius consists in the idea that it’s fine to have divisions and open conflicts. In fact, if there were no divisions at all, why would we have competitive elections? The point is that these conflicts can be settled peacefully and for specified time periods through the ballot box (and be kept within civil bounds by a constitution, election laws and informal norms).
Now, it does not follow that it is O.K. to vilify powerful people, but not O.K. to incite hatred against vulnerable minorities, in the way Mr. Trump does. But the fact is that Mr. Sanders (and, to an extent, Elizabeth Warren) are simply daring to diverge from sappy talk about healing America as a nation. They are saying loudly that we are not all equally in this together, but instead that we have sharply opposed interests. Their rhetoric is perfectly compatible with democracy; it’s just no malarkey. Right-wing populists, by contrast, insinuate that some people do not belong at all, or should be treated at best as second-class citizens. If the left says, “we are the 99 percent,” the right-wing populist in effect claims “we are the 100 percent.” This basic attack on civic equality and inclusion explains why, when in power, right-wing populists have invariably tried to take their countries in an authoritarian direction.
One might think that Mr. Sanders’s policies are crazy (even if in fact they are inspired by Denmark, one of the world’s most successful capitalist democracies). One might find him an old curmudgeon (even if his supposed “rudeness” cannot possibly be put into the same category as Mr. Trump’s spectacular cruelty). But neither his policies nor his personality poses a threat to the Republic. Mr. Trump does pose such a threat and all those NeverTrumpers who are now saying they would vote only for the right kind of Democrat better remember that no less than should liberals who equate democracy with centrist consensus.