5 Dance Performances to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to dance performances happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
BROOKLYN BALLET at the Mark O’Donnell Theater at the Actors Fund Arts Center (Feb. 13-14, 7:30 p.m.; through Feb. 16). In London in 1845, four early ballet stars caused a sensation when they performed Jules Perrot’s “Pas de Quatre,” an elegant illustration of ballet technique and an embodiment of the Romantic style. As part of Brooklyn Ballet’s “Revisionist History 2” program, four of its diverse dancers will perform the work. It will be paired with “Quartet” by the company’s founder and director, Lynn Parkerson. This work in progress is inspired by the structure and essence of “Pas de Quatre,” but it features four male hip-hop dancers. Rounding out the bill is Parkerson’s “Intersection,” which puts ballet dancers in dialogue with hip-hop artists.
718-246-0146, brooklynballet.org
CHE MALAMBO at the Joyce Theater (Feb. 11-12, 7:30 p.m.; Feb. 13-14, 8 p.m.; through Feb. 16). In 17th-century Argentina, gauchos flaunted their strength and agility through a lightning-quick percussive dance called malambo, often facing off in dance battles to prove their mettle. This all-male Argentine troupe continues the tradition, but with rock concert lighting and attitude. Gilles Brinas, the company’s founder and choreographer, provides rousing synchronized stomping routines for the dozen virile dancers, supported by the thunder of live drumming. It’s a spectacle, rooted in tradition, spiked with swagger.
212-242-0800, joyce.org
ANNE TERESA DE KEERSMAEKER at N.Y.U. Skirball Center for the Performing Arts (Feb. 13-15, 7:30 p.m.). The work of this highly regarded Belgian choreographer has been a frequent and welcome presence on New York stages in recent months. Her celebrated early works were performed here in the fall, and her take on Jerome Robbins’s moves for “West Side Story” are generating positive buzz ahead of that show’s opening on Feb. 20. Meanwhile, in the coming week, De Keersmaeker presents the United States premiere of her 2017 work “In the Midst of Life/Bach’s Cello Suites,” in which she is one of five dancers responding in her relaxed yet rigorous style to Bach’s famous set of six suites, played in their entirety by the renowned French cellist Jean-Guihen Queyras.
212-998-4941, nyuskirball.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
NEW YORK CITY BALLET at the David H. Koch Theater (Feb. 7, 8 p.m.; Feb. 8, 2 and 8 p.m.; Feb. 9, 3 p.m.; Feb. 11-13, 7:30 p.m.; through March 1). Alexei Ratmansky’s new work, “Voices,” set to the experimental music of the Austrian composer Peter Ablinger, receives a few more encores in the coming week in a program (on Friday, Saturday afternoon and Wednesday) that pairs it with Jerome Robbins’s “Opus 19/The Dreamer” (1979), Christopher Wheeldon’s “Polyphonia” (2001) and Justin Peck’s “Bright,” which debuted last year. The Saturday evening bill (performed again on Tuesday and Feb. 13) juxtaposes the ballets of Balanchine with Peck, while Sunday’s performance also features Balanchine (“Haieff Divertimento” and “Episodes”) and Peck (the lovely “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes”) and makes room for Robbins’s “Concertino” as well.
212-496-0600, nycballet.com
NEW YORK THEATER BALLET at Danspace Project (Feb. 13-15, 8 p.m.). This charming chamber company performs an eclectic mix of works by a variety of artists in both classical and contemporary styles. This program is a case in point, featuring “The Small Sonata” by the British choreographer Richard Alston; “The Soldier’s Tale” by the acclaimed former ballet star Robert La Fosse; “Uncaged” by Antonia Franceschi, a former dancer with New York City Ballet who danced under Balanchine; and “Double Andante” by Pam Tanowitz, one of the wittiest and most popular concert dance makers working today.
866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org