Anna Netrebko, Consider New Opera. Please.
If Giacomo Puccini, nearly 100 years after his death, could have attended the Metropolitan Opera’s recent New Year’s Eve gala, he surely would have been impressed. The evening featured Anna Netrebko, the company’s reigning prima donna, in acts from three of his operas — “La Bohème,” “Tosca” and “Turandot” — and she was in her glory.
Yet Puccini might well be perplexed by Ms. Netrebko’s career. He would probably wonder why she sings only roles that are a century old, at least. After all, the star singers of his day coveted opportunities to create characters in new works. Where are the new roles written for Ms. Netrebko?
Don’t get me wrong. We opera lovers depend on singers of today with superb voices and riveting stage presences to keep the great works of the past alive. Ms. Netrebko is poised to become a thrilling Turandot; she debuts the complete part onstage at the Bavarian State Opera in Munich later this month and will sing it at the Met during the 2021-22 season. Count me in.
But the fact that so many singers of her stature hew to the standard repertory suggests how stultified the world of opera has become since the days when Puccini’s operas took the world by storm. Of the 25 operas the Met is presenting this season, five are by Puccini; not a single offering is new. (The most recent is Philip Glass’s 35-year-old “Akhnaten,” which was a sold-out hit in the fall.)
We all love “La Bohème.” But the balance of old and new is way off, and Ms. Netrebko and other artists of her caliber could use their star power to help the situation. I wish they would: When Renée Fleming is the occasion for a new “Streetcar Named Desire” opera, or Plácido Domingo puts his celebrity behind an adaptation of “Il Postino,” it’s the exception that proves the rule.
Let’s take a look at the stars of the early 20th century, whose repertories were dominated by new and recent operas. When Enrico Caruso, who created a raft of roles in Italian works, sang Radamès in Verdi’s “Aida” to open the Met’s 1904-05 season, that opera was a more recent piece than “Akhnaten” is today.
And consider the sopranos who created the roles Ms. Netrebko sang at the gala. Cesira Ferrani, who had already premiered Puccini’s “Manon Lescaut,” sang Mimì in the 1896 premiere of “La Bohème.” Ferrani’s repertory also included Wagner’s Elsa and Eva and Verdi’s Gilda — all in works of the past 50 years.
Verdi’s Violetta, Desdemona and Aida were essentially modern parts when sung by Hariclea Darclée, who premiered the title role of “Tosca” in 1900 and had already created the leading parts in Catalani’s “La Wally” and Mascagni’s “Iris,” among other premieres. Rosa Raisa — who dazzled Puccini and, during a long career, won acclaim as his Mimì, Tosca and Butterfly — sang the title role in “Turandot” for its 1926 premiere in Milan. Seven months later, “Turandot” had its North American premiere at the Met featuring Maria Jeritza, who also debuted the title roles in both versions of Strauss’s “Ariadne auf Naxos,” as well as the Empress in his “Die Frau Ohne Schatten.” Jeritza was both a mainstream star and what we’d now describe (and usually ghettoize) as a “new-music soprano.”
Creating new works had been the central focus of opera since its birth in the early 17th century, a mission that continued into the early 20th century. What happened over the subsequent decades to make new operas, and the artists who sang them, seem like participants in a specialized corner of the genre?
One factor was the falling away of audiences for contemporary “classical” music. That story usually puts the blame on composers for writing complex, atonal works that no one wanted to hear. This is an unfair simplification of a complicated history. Many of these supposedly off-putting pieces are exciting. And many composers during these decades wrote in musical languages that, however new and challenging, also had great allure and beauty. But the damage was done.
A more significant problem came from the marketing of classical music once star performers, and their promoters, realized that big careers could be made from sticking to the classics. (It’s no surprise that this was the dawn of recordings.) And there is no shame in maintaining a repertory, or in uncovering earlier works in addition to creating new ones.
This honorable goal entails a significant shift. In the days before operas were available on recordings, audiences had insatiable hunger for new works and whole swaths of the repertory were allowed to essentially disappear — for example, most of the operas of the bel canto era of the early 19th century. It was not until the 1950s that many once-hailed works by Bellini, Donizetti and Rossini were heard again, thanks to powerful champions like Maria Callas and Joan Sutherland.
We should not let these, and other important earlier works, slip away. But do we need five Puccini operas in a single Met season to keep him on top? It’s hard to see how opera would be deprived if “Tosca,” “La Traviata” or “Carmen” were brought back only now and then with top-notch casts and freshly directed productions. Compare opera to musical theater, where a new Broadway production of “Gypsy,” one of the great musicals, comes along infrequently and each time is treated like a major event. Perhaps audiences clamor for “Aida” because that’s all they’ve been given.
If the Netrebkos and Jonas Kaufmanns of today are not fostering the creation of new operas, some notable artists are taking up the slack, among them sopranos like Julia Bullock and Barbara Hannigan.
Ms. Bullock, who first gained attention as a student at the Juilliard School in operas by Janacek and Massenet, has in recent years become a composers’ muse. She sang the lead in the 2017 premiere of John Adams’s “Girls of the Golden West” in San Francisco, and a crucial supporting role in the premiere of Terence Blanchard’s “Fire Shut Up in My Bones” at the Opera Theater of St. Louis last summer. She has collaborated on unconventional new works like “Perle Noire: Meditations for Joséphine,” a reflection on the life and art of Josephine Baker, and “Zauberland,” a mash-up of new music and Schumann’s “Dichterliebe.”
I could imagine Ms. Bullock making, for example, a wonderful Susanna in Mozart’s “Le Nozze di Figaro.” But she is clearly more drawn to new music — in this way, she’s paradoxically a kind of throwback.
Ms. Hannigan, who is also a conductor, has memorably sung the elusive heroine of Debussy’s “Pelléas et Mélisande” and the title role of Berg’s “Lulu,” already on the edges of the standard repertory. She helped make history by creating a leading role in George Benjamin’s “Written on Skin,” perhaps the most important opera of the 2010s, and also his “Lessons in Love and Violence.”
Artists must make their own choices and perform the works that inspire them. That goes for Ms. Netrebko, too, who won praise early in her career for taking on some 20th century operas by Prokofiev. When she brings blazing intensity and vocal splendor to Aida, Lady Macbeth and Turandot, it’s perhaps unfair to ask for more.
But it remains hard for me to understand how any artist of her gifts would not be drawn to new music as well the revered repertory. When certain artists dedicate themselves to living composers and others sing only the classics, it sends an unfortunate message: that new and old music are separate worlds.
It makes me admire all the more those singers whose careers combined the familiar and the new, like Renée Fleming, who created roles in works by Conrad Susa and André Previn (that “Streetcar”); Nathan Gunn, who became the go-to baritone for new operas by Tobias Picker, Daron Hagen, Jennifer Higdon and Peter Eotvos; and Dawn Upshaw. I will never forget hearing Ms. Upshaw as Clémence in the premiere of Kaija Saariaho’s “L’Amour de Loin” at the Salzburg Festival in 2000. At the Met she also created the role of Daisy Buchanan in John Harbison’s “The Great Gatsby,” and appeared there as Mozart’s Susanna, Despina and Pamina; Stravinsky’s Anne Trulove; Mélisande; and more.
Ms. Netrebko has ambitious plans, including the daunting title role of Strauss’s “Salome.” More power to her. Yet imagine if she spread the word that she was interested in singing something truly new. Composers would line up for the opportunity.