Name That Rash!
When my older girl was 18 months old, she became grouchy and listless and had a low-grade fever. A day or two later, she broke out in a bright red rash that inflamed her cheeks. “Fifth disease,” her pediatrician said, milliseconds after she walked into the exam room. I had never heard of it, and at first I thought she said “fist disease,” and I pictured a giant fist kneading my baby’s face, leaving that mass of red.
But it turns out fifth disease — which is caused by parvovirus B19 — is just one of many weird rash-causing illnesses that are common in children under 6. The illness is named after a number because decades ago, doctors didn’t know what caused once-common childhood conditions like measles, mumps and rubella, so they referred to them sequentially, said Dr. Nanette Silverberg, M.D., chief of pediatric dermatology for the Mount Sinai Health System. Fifth disease retained the number.
“One of the really challenging things about raising children is they almost always have a virus, and most of the time you don’t even know,” said Dr. Rebecca Pellett Madan, M.D., a pediatric infectious disease specialist at N.Y.U. Langone’s Hassenfeld Children’s Hospital. “You could be the most conscientious parent, but they’re going to get viruses, and they’re often shedding them without having any symptoms.”
What a magical, germ-strewn adventure we are all on.
Because rash-causing illnesses are omnipresent, we created an illustrated guide to five common ones that occur in young children: Scarlet fever, fifth disease, roseola, hand, foot and mouth disease and impetigo. Click here to read the whole thing, and please don’t read it during breakfast because I use the word “crust” in a repeated and foul manner!
If you’re concerned that your child has one of these maladies (or any unexplained rash), give your pediatrician a call. And always remember to thoroughly wash hands to prevent the spread of, well, most things.
P.S. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates. Read last week’s newsletter about the emotional push-pull of being a working parent.
P.P.S. We want to hear about your experiences with Early Intervention. Submit your responses below.
Click here for the complete illustrated guide to childhood rashes.
If you want a chance to get your Tiny Victory published, find us on Instagram @NYTparenting and use the hashtag #tinyvictories; email us; or enter your Tiny Victory at the bottom of this page. Include your full name and location. Tiny Victories may be edited for clarity and style. Your name, location and comments may be published, but your contact information will not. By submitting to us, you agree that you have read, understand and accept the Reader Submission Terms in relation to all of the content and other information you send to us.