Burbank, Calif.: In the Valley, Over the Hill From Los Angeles
BURBANK, Calif. — Marlén Jimenez was newly married and living in Lake Balboa, a residential neighborhood in the San Fernando Valley, when she decided she’d had enough of commuting through Los Angeles to her job in West Covina on U.S. Route 101.
“It’s always such heavy traffic,” Ms. Jiminez, 41, said of the highway. So she started to explore how she could shorten her commute.
She and her husband, Williams Rodriguez, 43, got in the car to find out. They took U.S. 101 until it intersected with State Route 134, then exited. They found themselves in Burbank, a city in Los Angeles County with highly ranked schools, quiet suburban streets and the headquarters of several of Hollywood’s leading film studios. They liked it.
“The streets were cleaner and cheerier,” Ms. Jimenez, a social worker, said of her impression that day. “And we realized the schools were very good. So we settled there.”
After a year in a small one-bedroom rental, the couple upgraded to a two-bedroom. Their son, now 9, was born a few years later, followed by a daughter. In 2019, the family decided it was time to give the children their own bedrooms, so they embarked on a new home search.
They landed in a three-bedroom, two-and-a-quarter-bath townhouse in a five-unit complex, paying $729,000 in October 2019. There’s no full yard, but there is a small outdoor space for the children.
Leaving Burbank to resettle was never an option. “We’ve formed a community here,” Ms. Jimenez said. “I love that Burbank is progressive and diverse.” While she would have loved to have been able to afford a single-family house with a backyard, she appreciates the quiet of her new location, and one of the most important factors remains the same: “In Los Angeles, everything is about how bad the traffic is going to be,.”
In Burbank, she said, “traffic-wise it’s not bad.”
Lucy Raisani, 34, and her husband, Jabbar Raisani, 37, came to Burbank from Los Angeles’s Mid-Wilshire neighborhood after the birth of their daughter, now 15 months.
“It quickly became apparent that being in an apartment with two dogs, a cat and a baby was a struggle,” said Ms. Raisani, a writer. “And we wanted some outdoor space. But finding that in L.A. is easier said than done.”
They focused their search on the San Fernando Valley, looking at more than 30 properties before choosing a three-bedroom, two-and-a-half-bath house in Burbank with high ceilings and an open-plan living and dining space. Built in 1998 by the couple selling it, it was a home, Ms. Raisani said, that had been treated with love: Its wide front and backyards were fully fenced, and there were small pencil ticks on the cupboard where the owners had marked their growing grandchildren. The Verdugo Mountains, and all the hiking trails they offer, were a five-minute drive away. And the neighbors, said Mr. Raisani, were quite friendly.
“For me there’s just been an overall increase in quality of life,” he said. “It took us a while to settle on the fact that we were going to be in the Valley, but in the end, it’s been a huge benefit.”
The couple paid $1.27 million for the house, then added a new roof and replaced the fireplace and bathtub, among other renovations. Mr. Raisani, a filmmaker, also converted a backyard shed into a home office. “Before, my office was a desk next to a crib, and that wasn’t particularly conducive,” he said. “Now I have my own space, and that’s been huge.”
Burbank sits in the San Fernando Valley, bracketed by the Verdugo Mountains to the north and Griffith Park, the largest municipal green space in Los Angeles, to the south. Downtown Burbank, a shopping, dining and entertainment cluster with free parking and a Metrolink station for trains to Ventura, Lancaster and Los Angeles Union Station, sits just off I-5 in the city’s center. Hollywood Burbank Airport, in the city’s northwest corner, serves more than five million passengers a year and offers rail service to Downtown Los Angeles (with a connection).
Burbank is also home to the largest Ikea in North America, as well as a number of Hollywood studios, including Disney and Warner Bros. But along Magnolia Boulevard, you’ll find local businesses, cafes and shops, including Romancing the Bean, a family-owned coffee shop; Porto’s, a well-loved Cuban bakery; and a number of rockabilly-inspired vintage clothing shops.
Prices in Burbank for single-family houses are creeping upward. The median sales price for single- family houses so far in 2020 is $910,000, up from $899,000 in 2019, $874,999 in 2018 and $780,000 in 2017, according to the California Regional Multiple Listing Service (CRMLS).
Prices for condominiums and townhouses, however, are holding steady. The median price for condos and townhouses so far in 2020 is $535,000, the same as in 2019. In 2018, the median price for condos and townhouses was $565,000, up from $490,000 in 2017, according to the CRMLS.
Renters can find a studio apartment for $1,450 a month, a two-bedroom for about $2,400 a month, and a four-bedroom house for under $4,000 a month.
In 1992, Burbank officials took out full-page ads in the Hollywood dailies to declare the city “The Media Capital of the World,” a designation they chose after the City Council approved a massive expansion of Walt Disney Studios.
Burbank does serve as an invaluable cog in the production machine that keeps the Los Angeles film industry chugging. But nearly three decades after those splashy ads in Variety and the Hollywood Reporter, the city is more than a home for the studios. It’s also, residents say, a protected pocket of suburbia in the center of a huge metro area.
“Burbank will always be a desirable place to live, because of people like us, who are family- oriented,” said Sofia Sedrakian, 38, a local realtor with the Miranda Team, an affiliate of Keller Williams, who has lived in Burbank with her family since 1998. “There are so many parks and recreation centers. In the summer, I never have to worry about activities for my kids.”
It’s a seller’s market in Burbank, and a few new development projects in the works — including LaTerra Select Burbank, a mixed-used site that will include a hotel, shops and two multistory apartment buildings — are slowly changing the city’s face. But the character, said Leila Drewes, 59, also a realtor on the Miranda Team, remains the same.
“We have younger families moving in, and hipsters,” Ms. Drewes said. “But people who come to live here stay here.”
The Burbank Unified School District comprises 11 elementary schools, three middle schools and three high schools.
During the 2018-19 school year, 65 percent of district third-graders met benchmarks for English language arts on the California Smarter Balanced Assessment test, compared with 43 percent in the Los Angeles Unified School District and 49 percent across California.
During the same year, 63 percent of district third-graders met benchmarks in math, compared with 44 percent in the Los Angeles Unified School District and 50 percent across California.
Sixty-one percent of district eighth graders met benchmarks for English language arts, compared with 41 percent in Los Angeles Unified and 49 percent across California; in math, 48 percent met benchmarks, compared with 29 percent in Los Angeles Unified and 37 percent across California. (According to the California Department of Education, students with scores at or above benchmark levels on these tests are ready for higher-level coursework).
Older students attend either Burbank High School or John Burroughs High School. During the 2017-18 school year, 87 percent of students at Burbank and 89 percent of students at Burroughs who took the SAT exam met benchmarks for English, compared with 71 percent statewide; 72 percent of students at Burbank and 74 percent at Burroughs met benchmarks for math, compared with 50 percent statewide. (For the SATs, the College Board defines students as “college ready” when their test scores meet a benchmark of 480 in English and 530 in math.)
Downtown Los Angeles is 20 minutes away without traffic, and 45 minutes with. Westside Los Angeles and the beaches can be reached in 30 minutes on clear roads; in traffic, budget for 90 minutes. Pasadena is 15 minutes to the east.
Burbank takes its name from the dentist David Burbank, who built sheep and wheat farms in the area. His decision in 1874 to sell a right of way to the Southern Pacific Railroad was the catalyst for the city’s initial growth. In 1928, brothers Allan and Malcolm Loughead, the founders of the Loughead Aircraft Manufacturing Company, which would evolve into the Lockheed Aircraft Company, established a Lockheed plant in Burbank (utilizing the phonetic spelling of their name). United Airport, which would become Hollywood Burbank Airport, opened in 1930.
Film and production studios have been in Burbank since the 1920s, with Disney arriving in 1939.