A Watchful Eye on Threats That Could Alter the Election
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
Nicole Perlroth, a reporter for The Times who covers cybersecurity, recently broke the news that Burisma — the Ukrainian gas company at the heart of President Trump’s impeachment — was hacked by the same Russian operators who in 2016 broke into the Democratic National Committee and the email inbox of John Podesta, Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman. In an “ask me anything” session on the website Reddit, Ms. Perlroth answered questions about that story and cybersecurity threats to November’s election. The responses have been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.
Could the Russians hack our election machines this year to change vote tallies?
Yes. Every year at the annual hacking conferences in Las Vegas, security researchers show just how easily they can break into ballot marking machines to switch votes. The question is: Could Russian hackers (or anyone else do this at scale, without anyone noticing? I think it would actually be easier (and cheaper) to influence the election through other means. This could take the form of disinformation, or by hacking the voter registration databases (something Russian hackers did in 2016) or check-in software to keep voters from casting their ballot in a swing state. This is something I’m particularly worried about, especially in a close election.
How big was the Burisma hack?
This was a very targeted “phishing” campaign against employees who work at Burisma subsidiaries. By getting into those employees’s email accounts, Russian hackers would have been able to get into Burisma proper. We still don’t know what the Russian hackers got in terms of emails, personal data, etc. The expectation is that they may be likely trying to pull a “John Podesta 2.0” and dump emails that could be embarrassing to former Vice President Joe Biden or his son.
Is the Trump administration doing anything to protect against hackers for the upcoming election?
We’ve reported that the president has been reticent to do anything to address election security, especially when it concerns Russian interference. The president still questions the idea that Moscow meddled in the 2016 election, viewing such talk as a challenge to his legitimacy. He went as far as to suggest that U.S. officials collaborate with Russian officials on cybersecurity. He also embraced a Russian-backed conspiracy theory that shifted the blame to Ukraine. That said, there are areas where we are more secure than we were in 2016: The Department of Homeland Security is working with state and local officials to assess their cybersecurity defenses. Local election officials are much more aware about threats. Counties that lacked any kind of paper backup record of votes are switching to machines that produce a paper record. And tech companies are working to take down fake accounts, and making it more difficult for foreigners to buy political ads. But experts say we are still nowhere near where we need to be, and our adversaries are becoming more stealthy.
What can the average citizen do about any of this?
A lot. If you look at the Burisma hacks, it started with “spearphishing,” an attack in which hackers get their target to click on a link and enter their username/password. Spearphishing is a lot harder when you turn on “two factor authentication.” This is an extra security mechanism that will ask you for a second pin code, often one that is texted to your phone, anytime [companies] detect someone trying to log into your account from a strange computer. I highly recommend it.
With Russia, what’s the worst-case scenario?
1. A repeat of the 2016 Russian interference, like the one we are beginning to see play out on Burisma. Russian hackers could dump Burisma emails, real ones, or even plant fake ones. If they mixed in fake emails with the real documents, it would be nearly impossible for reporters to determine which are real and which are faked.
2. They hack the election machines. They change votes from one candidate to another, on systems with no paper backup.
3. They sabotage the voter registration data, or the software that is used to check voters in at the polls.
4. They prop up fake accounts on Facebook, Twitter and other outlets to sow further discord among Americans. If they accomplished all this, what we would get is an election outcome we could not trust, in a partisan and media environment where our faith in institutions is low. And it would take years to suss out what happened.