She Had a Preemie — and Then She Started to Ask Important Questions
EARLY
An Intimate History of Premature Birth and What It Teaches Us About Being Human
By Sarah DiGregorio
Sarah DiGregorio was 28 weeks pregnant when she found out that her baby had stopped growing. Two days later, her daughter, Mira, was delivered via an emergency cesarean section. She weighed 1 pound 13 ounces.
“My body had been trying to kill her,” DiGregorio writes.
“Early” opens like a medical thriller. Newborn Mira is whisked away to a neonatal intensive care unit while her parents are bombarded with statistics, terrified about her future. It closes with Mira, a robust toddler, diving into a pit of foam blocks. This isn’t a spoiler — but the heart of DiGregorio’s illuminating book isn’t just about her family’s journey; it’s an expansive examination of the history and ethics of neonatology.
For most of human history, babies born months too soon were left to die. They were considered less than full-fledged beings, not quite living and therefore not worth saving. Plus, there wasn’t much to be done.
The field of neonatology took off in the second half of the 20th century when a few pediatricians, often against the advice of colleagues, dared to save newborns.
In 1961, Dr. Mildred Stahlman, a Vanderbilt University pediatrician, fitted a premature baby into a miniature iron lung machine. These machines, originally for polio patients, used negative pressure to pull open weak chest muscles to draw air into the lungs. The baby survived. Stahlman then created one of the first neonatal units and trained a cadre of disciples.
By the 1970s, negative pressure machines were replaced with positive pressure ones that worked by inflating the lungs. It was a tricky technique that required threading the tiniest of tubes through the trachea and into the lungs. Dr. Maria Delivoria-Papadopoulos, then a pediatrician at Toronto’s Hospital for Sick Children, was one of the first to try. Seventeen attempts were unsuccessful. Then she saved one baby girl. Her tenacity paved the way for half a million people born prematurely living today.
And yet, DiGregorio reminds us, every advance — every attempt at every advance — brings with it new dilemmas. Such innovations may save a child’s life but can leave them with significant disabilities. A doctor cannot predict how a particular premature baby will fare. Complicating the matter, who’s to say what kind of life is worth fighting for and how much treatment is too much?
In “Early,” we read about neonatologists, bioethicists and parents grappling with the toughest decisions. We meet pediatric palliative care specialists and parents who forgo further treatment and embrace their babies as they die. DiGregorio covers other factors that influence prematurity, such as poverty and racism.
DiGregorio, a food editor and writer, is such a beautiful storyteller, I found myself underlining passages, turning corners of pages and keeping track of the page numbers at the back of the book until I had a hodgepodge of numbers scribbled on top of each other.
[In NYT Parenting: Sarah DiGregorio writes about struggling to feed her newborn daughter.]
She imagines her nonfunctioning placenta as “a beat-up old car, chugging along, belching smoke”; after her emergency C-section, she writes, her body “felt like an empty house that had been vacated in a rush, leaving dirty dishes in the sink.” And later, DiGregorio refers to a 1-year-old as “that sweet spot between baby and toddler.”
By the epilogue, when the narrative returns to DiGregorio’s personal story, readers will appreciate how medicine lurches forward with leaps and mishaps along with the inevitably tense discussions about which path to take and when. All doctors wrestle with these issues, yet they seem particularly poignant when we are dealing with tiny babies. That’s because, as DiGregorio puts it, the field of neonatology has “changed the way we understand what it means to be alive, what it means to be human, and what constitutes a life worth living.”