Military Kids Change School Up to 9 Times. So Let’s Make It Easier.
By the time most military children complete secondary school, they will have switched schools up to nine times. These frequent changes between schools of strikingly varying quality trouble military children both socially and academically. Though Congress has written legislation that would ease transitions for military children and add flexibility to their parents’ choices for education, the bill, the Education Savings Accounts for Military Families Act of 2019, has sat in committee since March.
A Military Times survey found that over a third of the members of the armed forces report dissatisfaction with their children’s education as a significant factor leading to their leaving the service. With the ESA Act, as the legislation is known, a military family could apply for up to $6,000 through the Department of Education to help with private-school tuition, home schooling, tutoring, college-prep classes and online courses in place of public school. The lowest-income members of the military — junior enlisted — would have first consideration for such funding. Above all, an Education Savings Account offers a family flexibility — a way to fill in the gaps that widen with every change of school. An account would help an airman’s daughter at say, Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Ala., take online classes instead of attend her local high school, which may not offer German or advanced calculus, the classes she took when her father was stationed at Ramstein Air Base, Germany. An account would help a Marine’s son who struggled to maintain his grades after moving three years in a row and found a private school willing to help him catch up near Camp Lejeune in North Carolina.
Another bill, the CHOICE Act, sponsored by Senator Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina, is also stalled in committee. In terms of scope, the CHOICE Act is targeted and smaller. It would authorize $10 million per year, rather than the ESA Act’s $1.2 billion per year. Though both bills are funded through the Department of Education, if the CHOICE Act advances through the legislative process, it would most likely be attached to the annual defense budget.
The stakes are high. Education Savings Accounts or a similar voucher system could help over 528,000 children — active-duty service members’ kids who often have to play catch-up as they hop from school district to school district because of their parents’ assignments.
This small demographic faces a lot of challenges: parents’ lengthy deployments to combat zones, frequent moves and the constant readjustment as a child looks for a place to fit in, whether with friends, academics, sports, music or simply a place to sit in the lunchroom. With these moves from one military installation to another, often every one, two or three years, there is one constant: You never know the quality of the local public school or how the transition from one school to the next will work out.
My family’s story of frequent military moves is not unusual. It shows the universal challenges faced by military kids. My 11- and 10-year-old daughters are attending their fifth schools. Their experience includes instruction at Montessori, private secular, public and parochial schools. With each new military assignment, my husband and I tried to assess which school option would be the best. At most locations, we chose a secular private or parochial school. We do this not because it’s healthy for our finances, but because we want the best opportunity for our children. We want them to fit in right away without struggling to make sure that the language arts class taught in Tennessee matches what is taught in Massachusetts public schools (it doesn’t). All transitions are hard, but moving a child from one private-school or home-schooling community to another is a gentler, more flexible process than subjecting them to the often rigid rules of public schools. Additionally, many of the public school options either on or right outside a military installation are subpar, and private or home-school options may be better.
Moving frequently with the Army means that our kids are subjected to the tyranny of geography. Most Army installations are in fairly remote locations where the on-post schools were once federally administered by the Department of Defense. As a cost-cutting measure in the past decade, the department has shifted the burden of schooling to the counties. A child who goes to school at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii, attends a District of Honolulu school. A child who attends middle school in Fort Hood, Tex., belongs to the Killeen Independent School District. There is never a guarantee that children’s education will shift seamlessly between the states or that students will be granted enough credits to graduate from high school on time, depending on the restrictions of the county or district.
Admittedly, fighting for legislation to help the children of active-duty service members doesn’t make for headline-grabbing news. But as the mother of four, married to an Army officer in his 25th year of service, I know that proposed legislation, such as the Educational Savings Account Act or the CHOICE Act, would bring needed flexibility to many military families.