Pompeo’s Rage Aimed at Mary Louise Kelly of NPR
To the Editor:
Re “Pompeo Fumes at Reporter’s Questions on Ukraine” (news article, Jan. 26):
So, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo does not like a question asked by a respected NPR reporter, Mary Louise Kelly, ends the interview, shouts and curses at Ms. Kelly, asks her to find Ukraine on an unlabeled world map (which she does) and subsequently calls the news media “unhinged.” Really?
Given Mr. Pompeo’s behavior, one has to wonder, Who is really unhinged? Mr. Pompeo, please look in the mirror and ask yourself, What has become of me, an evangelical Christian, serving and covering for an amoral and lying president and screaming and cursing at a well-respected reporter who is simply doing her job?
Michael Hadjiargyrou
Centerport, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Mike Pompeo should give his unlabeled map to President Trump (as he did to Mary Louise Kelly of NPR). Let’s see if Mr. Trump knows where Ukraine is. Ms. Kelly did.
Barry Goldberg
White Plains, N.Y.
To the Editor:
In celebrating Mike Pompeo’s shameful treatment of an NPR reporter, Mary Louise Kelly, Donald Trump has reached a new low. It seems that Mr. Trump has no sense of shame or decency. He sees himself in a world without rules, without right and wrong, where the strong oppress the weak as a matter of course, and where they celebrate it and feel good about it. Mr. Pompeo’s behavior was that of a bully and a coward, but Mr. Trump’s, in celebrating and congratulating him for it, is even worse.
How has it come to this? What have we done, as a people, as a country, in electing such a person? Republicans and supporters of the president should be ashamed. The remedy is, as everyone keeps saying, at the ballot box, but the remedy is also in decent people everywhere standing up and denouncing this behavior for what it is: thuggish, shameful and un-American.
Tim Shaw
Cambridge, Mass.
To the Editor:
Re “Let the Press Do Its Job,” by Mary Louise Kelly (Op-Ed, Jan. 29):
No surprise that Ms. Kelly works for NPR. Her opinion piece was so classy. No ugly put-downs, just the facts of what occurred during her interviews with Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, and Mike Pompeo. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
Carol Hibbert
New Canaan, Conn.