She Was Prescribed Three Antibiotics but Only Got Worse. Why?
The young woman suddenly stopped in the middle of the sidewalk in New Haven, Conn.; her backpack felt strangely heavy. The weight on her shoulders seemed unbearable, as if the bag were filled with bricks rather than the usual notebooks, pens, computer and water bottle. She swung the bag to the ground as the flow of pedestrian traffic streamed around her. Her shoulders throbbed, and her back felt sore. Her legs trembled from the effort of walking. Still, she couldn’t just stand there on the street. She was in her last semester of college, and she had to get to a lecture. She heaved her backpack onto her shoulders and slowly made her way across campus.
The young woman felt too awful to pay attention to the speaker. Every muscle ached. She thought she must be coming down with something. As soon as she could, she made her way to the infirmary. She wasn’t sure if she had ever felt as miserable as she did walking those few blocks.
The young woman hadn’t felt well for nearly three months, she told the doctor-in-training at the infirmary. She had been traveling in Europe and Asia with a school group and was on her way back when her throat started to hurt. At home, she developed a cough and a rumble in her chest. When it didn’t get better after a couple of weeks, she made her first visit to the infirmary. The nurse practitioner had listened to her story and her lungs. She probably had some kind of bacterial bronchitis or pneumonia, the nurse practitioner told her. She received a prescription for an antibiotic.
She took the pills. They didn’t help. The cough was still there, though maybe the rattle in her chest was better. But her head felt completely clogged. She couldn’t breathe through her nose, and her ears were so stuffed that it was hard to hear. When she felt no better after finishing the medicine, she went back to the infir­mary, where a doctor prescribed a different antibiotic and suggested that she see an ear, nose and throat specialist. After that, she still felt no better. Maybe a little worse. She had a headache that came and went with no discernible pattern.
She called the E.N.T. and made an appointment. That doctor looked into her ears and scoped her nose and the back of her throat. His verdict: sinusitis, the patient recalled. He started her on a third, more powerful antibiotic, Bactrim, and gave her a six-day Medrol dose pack, a type of steroids to reduce the swelling in her nose that was blocking her sinuses and causing the infection.
By the time she got to the infirmary, she had finished the six days of steroids and was almost done with the 10-day course of Bactrim. And she still wasn’t feeling any better. Indeed, she told the young doctor, she actually felt much worse — too weak and tired to carry her backpack. And her headache had gone from occasional to a persistent terrible pain. Her legs felt weak and shaky. Electrical shocks zapped down her legs to her calves. She had never felt so sick in her life, she sobbed.
On examination, she had a fever, and her heart was racing. Her back was quite tender just below her waistline. And although the young woman felt as if her legs were weak, her strength seemed normal to the examining doctor. The fact that she was traveling before her symptoms started, and that they had gotten worse despite the very reliable antibiotics she had taken, worried the doctor. She needed to go to the hospital for further evaluation.
It was Friday night, and the E.R. was packed when the young woman arrived. The doctor examined her and was concerned about fever in addition to back pain that radiated to the legs and caused weakness. The scariest possibility was that some infection had found its way from her sinuses or lungs to the space inside the spine — forming what’s known as an epidural abscess. The antibiotic she had been taking was stopped. An M.R.I. of her entire spine and brain was ordered. Blood was sent to be tested for any evidence of a tick-borne illness or Epstein-Barr virus. If none of those tests told them anything, she would need a spinal tap to look for an infection there.
The patient was given a painkiller, and she finally slept — something she hadn’t been able to do for a couple of days. Her parents, who lived one town away, took turns sleeping in the chair by her bed. The next day, she was given an M.R.I. There was no abscess inside the bones of her spine.
But what was making her feel so bad? She didn’t have mononucleosis; she didn’t have any of the tick-borne infections she was tested for. The only abnormality was a sinus infection noted on the M.R.I. But why had she been sick for so long? Had she picked up some kind of fungus or para­site when she was traveling? The hospitalists called in an infectious-disease specialist; they didn’t want to miss anything.
It was late afternoon when Dr. Manisha Juthani, an infectious-disease doctor, reviewed the chart of the young woman. The antibiotics hadn’t helped, so it seemed unlikely that her symptoms were caused by a bacterial infection. And because it had been months since she got back from her travels, Juthani was pretty sure this was not something she picked up abroad.
Juthani introduced herself to the young woman and her parents. Although the lights were off and the room was dim, the specialist felt reassured by how well the young woman looked. And the patient said she felt better too: The painkiller had helped. Her back pain had eased. So had the pain in her muscles. But her neck still felt a little stiff, and the headache was unchanged. And the congestion, too, was as bad as ever.
Juthani asked the parents to step out of the room and then turned on the light. Does the light bother your eyes? she asked. The young woman shook her head. With the lights on, Juthani noted something she hadn’t seen earlier. The young woman’s chest, shoulders and back were covered with dozens of faint pink dots. She pointed them out to the patient, who hadn’t noticed them either. Did the spots itch? she asked. They didn’t. Was this a contact dermatitis from the detergent used to wash the sheets and gown she was wearing? The young woman said she had sensitive skin. Could she have some kind of virus with a fever and rash? Juthani thought they should watch her for another night.
The next day, the rash was much darker and had spread almost everywhere. Arms, legs, stomach, back, even between her toes — her skin itched ferociously. When Juthani returned that morning, she could make the diagnosis from the doorway. What the young woman had was clearly a drug rash, most likely caused by the 10-day course of Bactrim that she was given by the E.N.T. (Bactrim causes up to three times as many allergic reactions as any other antibiotic in women.) The six days of steroids had probably suppressed the reaction while she took them. But after that, the medication seemed to have triggered an unusual and severe allergic reaction, causing fever, muscle pain and weakness, along with back pain and finally the characteristic rash.
As for what was causing the congestion and sinusitis — Juthani told me that she thought it was probably allergies; the young woman had a known allergy to mold. Or maybe a couple of back-to-back viral infections. But it wasn’t a bacterial infection.
The young woman was discharged and given a steroid cream for the itch. She had a follow-up appointment with her E.N.T. the next week. She was still congested, and the specialist gave her a prescription for yet another antibiotic. She decided not to fill it. None of the other drugs had helped, and the last one sent her to the hospital and produced the ugly rash. Enough, she decided. All her symptoms cleared up a few weeks later. She’s hoping they never come back, but if they do, she’ll think twice before trying antibiotics.