What’s on TV Thursday: ‘Cheer’ and ‘Pavarotti’
CHEER Stream on Netflix. In the series “Last Chance U,” the director Greg Whiteley captured junior-college football on and off the field, mixing sports documentary wins and defeats with personal portraits of players. In this new series, Whiteley turns his attention to cheerleading. “Cheer” focuses on the competitive squad at Navarro College in Corsicana, Tex. The season builds toward a big competition — but, as with “Last Chance U,” its heart is set less on the question of whether the team will win or lose and more on the players, whose personal lives and emotions rush to the surface as they chase athletic perfection. “The way that we prepare, you keep going until you get it right,” the team’s coach, Monica Aldama, says in the first episode. “And then you keep going until you can’t get it wrong.”
IMMORTAL BELOVED (1994) Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. This year is the 250th anniversary of the birth of Beethoven. One way to celebrate could be to revisit this biographical drama, in which Gary Oldman plays that composer. The film, directed by Bernard Rose, frames its plot around attempts by one of Beethoven’s early biographers, Anton Schindler (played by Jeroen Krabbé), to determine the identity of the “immortal beloved” that Beethoven once addressed a love letter to. “Think of this as an extremely ambitious classical music video, with visual ideas that merely echo the moods of the music.” Janet Maslin wrote in her review for The New York Times. She also wrote that Beethoven is “dazzlingly impersonated” by Oldman.
PAVAROTTI (2019) 8 p.m. on Showtime. For a music luminary doubleheader, pair “Immortal Beloved” with this documentary about the opera singer Luciano Pavarotti, directed by Ron Howard. The film mixes archival footage, audio recordings and interviews (including with other musicians like José Carreras, Bono and Lang Lang) to appraise his career, which brought him success both inside the realm of traditional opera and outside of it. “The importance of the new documentary, the opportunity it provides,” Zachary Woolfe wrote in an article in The Times last year, “is to make us reckon with these two Pavarottis as one, and in doing so to recognize a side of opera that many of us who love it as high art like to ignore. The vulgar side, the trashy, the elemental, the baldly populist — the side never better embodied than by this hulking, sweaty man with stringy hair, a patchy beard and an unforgettable sound.”
BAD BOYS (1995) and BAD BOYS II (2003) 5:30 p.m. and 8 p.m. on USA Network. Will Smith and Martin Lawrence are set to return as a Miami crime-fighting duo in “Bad Boys for Life,” out next week. Its impending release is a good excuse to rewatch these first two movies in the “Bad Boys” series — though the new movie will be missing Michael Bay, who directed the original pair. Whether the new movie’s directors, Bilall Fallah and Adil El Arbi, can successfully carry Bay’s torch (or detonator) remains to be seen.