Lingering Questions After the Iran Crisis
To the Editor:
Re “Esper Didn’t See Evidence of Plot to Hit Embassies” (front page, Jan. 13):
Among the many questions swirling around the contradictory reports offered by the defense secretary, the secretary of state and the national security adviser about the supposedly imminent threats that led to the assassination of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, I have two: Which embassies or other facilities were warned about this threat, and what defensive action were they advised to take?
If there was such an imminent threat, what other options were offered to President Trump to avert it?
Miriam Levine Helbok
Bronx
To the Editor:
“Iran’s Admission It Shot Down Jet Meets With Fury” (front page, Jan. 12) caused me no small amount of cognitive dissonance. Is there any doubt that absent our killing of an Iranian general the passengers on Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 would have happily reached their destination by now?
The world appears to be thrilled that Iranians have taken to the streets because their government was grossly incompetent and then lied about it. Isn’t that what we Americans so passively endure on a daily basis?
George M. Cronin
New York
To the Editor:
Wait, let me get this straight. The United States, my country, unilaterally pulls out of the nuclear agreement between Iran and our allies, an agreement that Iran was honoring. This provocative action made the world less safe for everyone.
We (the United States) then proceed to assassinate Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the top general of Iran, a sovereign nation. We had plans to assassinate another Iranian official in Yemen, Abdul Reza Shahlai, but we were unsuccessful.
Then our secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, appeared on television to announce new sanctions against Iran, to persuade Iran to “behave like a normal nation.”
Not sure what the secretary wants. Does he mean the behavior we’re modeling by the one-sided, ethically and legally questionable actions listed above?
Judith Koll Healey
Minneapolis