California and Coronavirus: Eight Cases Are Confirmed in the State
[Sign up for our daily newsletter about news from California.]
SAN FRANCISCO — The seventh and eighth cases of coronavirus in California were confirmed this week in people who had been evacuated from Wuhan, China, to the United States. The patients were on separate State Department-arranged flights that mostly carried American citizens to Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego.
Four of the state’s cases are in Southern California and four in the San Francisco Bay Area. California not only has the most cases of any state, it is also on the forefront of quarantine efforts in the United States.
The federal government has imposed a 14-day quarantine for hundreds of people it has evacuated from China, housing them at military bases including Miramar, March Air Reserve Base in Riverside County and Travis Air Force Base in Solano County.
“The novel coronavirus is a serious public health concern, however the risk to the general public in California remains low,” Dr. Sonia Angell, the director of the state’s public health department, said in a statement.
Americans whose flights took off from China after 5 p.m. Eastern time on Feb. 2 and who had spent time recently in Hubei Province, where Wuhan is the provincial capital, will be subject to a quarantine of up to two weeks under restrictions announced by the Trump administration.
Though the disease has killed more than 1,000 people worldwide, the outbreak remains limited in the United States, where there have been 14 confirmed cases and no deaths.
The case of a married couple who live in San Benito County was the first involving a household person-to-person transmission of coronavirus in California, public health officials said.
In the six other cases — two each in Santa Clara and San Diego Counties and one each in Los Angeles and Orange Counties — the patients are believed to have been infected in Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, before traveling to California.
Dr. Angell said in a recorded video message in January that the health risk to the general public in California was low. “But we still consider this a serious public health concern,” she said. At the time, around 40 people in California had been tested for the disease, according to the department.
But understanding the specific risks to the state centers on questions that have not yet been answered: How transmissible is the disease? And how long is its incubation period? Estimates of the incubation period range from two days to two weeks.
Christine Kreuder Johnson, an infectious disease expert at the University of California, Davis, said California was more vulnerable than some other places in the United States because of the large number of people in the state traveling back and forth to China.
“It does put us right on that front line,” she said.
Many flights from China entered the state before the disease was recognized and screenings at the San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York airports were put into place on Jan 17.
It is an open question, Dr. Johnson said, whether any passengers on the earlier flights were infected and had transmitted the disease to others.
Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and American Airlines have suspended all service to mainland China.
Dr. Johnson said she was optimistic based on the previous outbreaks like SARS that the coronavirus could be extinguished.
“There is good hope for it to be controlled,” she said.
Among the 195 people initially quarantined on a military base in Southern California were diplomats, infants, a football player and a theme-park designer.
Their flight was the first one that was organized by the State Department to leave Wuhan.
“It’s not Club Med, but we’re fortunate to be here,” said Matthew McCoy, the theme-park designer who lives in Shanghai but was in Wuhan working on a mall he is refashioning. “I try to stay busy with my work, social media and my hotel workout regimen.”
The evacuees had their temperatures taken regularly and their noses swabbed, and were advised against shaking hands or hugging. They were released on Feb. 11 without any cases of coronavirus emerging.
While the spread of the disease has been limited in California, it has already had a social impact.
College students from mainland China as well as Americans in California of East Asian descent are reporting suspicious glances on public transport and rising xenophobia.
At the University of California, Berkeley, which has a large Chinese student population, officials apologized after the university health center posted an image that included “xenophobia” among a list of “common reactions” to the coronavirus. It was condemned as giving legitimacy to racism.
Dr. Stacie San Miguel, the director of medical services at the University of California, San Diego’s student health center, said students and others had been flocking to physicians for checkups.
“Especially the people who have been to China and had a runny nose, they’re not sure — is this something or not something? — so there has been some anxiety,” Dr. San Miguel said.
In Northern California, multiple cities canceled their Lunar New Year celebrations, including Stockton and Elk Grove.