The Final Debate Before the Iowa Caucuses
To the Editor:
Re “Gender and War Dominate Debate by 6 Democrats” (front page, Jan. 15):
I voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, and, as Bernie Sanders has pointed out, she received three million more votes than Donald Trump, proving that a woman can win the popular vote.
It is disappointing that Elizabeth Warren, facing polls that show she may no longer be in the lead, has resorted to playing the “gender card” by making allegations that Mr. Sanders questioned a woman’s electability at a private meeting in 2018.
For most Democrats, the most important thing in this election is defeating Mr. Trump. The polls show that Bernie Sanders, among others, can beat Mr. Trump. But there would be nothing wrong with raising for discussion the difficulties, in the real world, that a democratic socialist would face in the general election.
The same is true with respect to a woman candidate, or, for example, if there were one in the race, the difficulties an atheist would face, regardless of how competent. Ms. Warren appears to be developing a track record of going negative when the polls start to bring bad news.
John M. O’Connor
Montclair, N.J.
To the Editor:
Re “Elizabeth Warren Says Bernie Sanders Sent Volunteers ‘Out to Trash Me’” (news article, Jan. 13):
Not even friendships are sacred in the political arena, as Bernie Sanders’s campaign claims that Elizabeth Warren is unable to bring any new voters to the Democratic Party. Of course, mudslinging is nothing new. But Mr. Sanders’s attempt to tear Ms. Warren down, in efforts to build himself up, speaks more about Mr. Sanders’s negativity than it does about Ms. Warren’s alleged shortcomings.
And while Mr. Sanders may believe that all is fair in love, war and politics, polls may find Democrats rallying around Ms. Warren as a result. We are 10 months away from the presidential election, and this is only the beginning of what is yet to come.
JoAnn Lee Frank
Clearwater, Fla.
To the Editor:
The last Democratic debate before the Iowa caucuses underscored the candidates’ essential unity and agreement on such key concerns as national security and climate change, which should be seen as the most compelling and convincing issues for Democrats in their quest for victory in November. The references to President Trump, however, were overshadowed by the kind of bickering and rehashing of domestic policy that characterized past debates.
Mr. Trump has been giving the Democratic contenders a growing gift of reasons to attack him directly and to limit to one term the damage he has inflicted on our institutions, values and standing on the world stage.
It’s past time for the Democratic hopefuls to call more attention to Mr. Trump’s reckless foreign policy, disdain for the environment and a host of other issues and not lose sight of the central goal of the 2020 election — to reverse the harm this president has caused before it’s too late.
Roger Hirschberg
Bondville, Vt.
To the Editor:
I watched the most recent presidential debate and turned off the TV at the end with the same feeling I had after previous debates. I liked all the Democratic contenders but still have no favorite candidate. Most of my friends who are committed Democrats say the same thing: We’ll vote for anyone who can beat President Trump.
I suggest that the Democratic candidates consider announcing their team in advance of the primaries and caucuses. Name your vice-presidential running mate now. Tell us who your first nominee for the Supreme Court will be. Name your cabinet picks. By choosing your team now you’ll provide voters with a better appreciation of the kind of president you’ll be. You can excite the electorate with bold choices (example: Barack Obama for Supreme Court).
Paul Feiner
Greenburgh, N.Y.
The writer is Greenburgh town supervisor.
To the Editor:
To all the people who didn’t vote in 2016 because you didn’t like Hillary Clinton: Look what you (and the rest of us) got. Please don’t let that happen again. Any one of the candidates trying to get the Democratic nomination would be so much better than President Trump.
Barbara J. Kelly
Broomfield, Colo.