Sackler Family Member Sells Upper East Side Townhouse for $38 Million
Another member of the Sackler pharmaceutical family has sold off a Manhattan property.
Mortimer D.A. Sackler closed on the sale of a sprawling townhouse at 8 East 75th Street for $38 million — the priciest transaction in New York City in January, in an otherwise quiet month. The buyer was the hedge fund titan Israel Englander.
In December, David A. Sackler, a cousin, sold his apartment, with storage, at 200 East 66th Street, a.k.a. Manhattan House, for nearly $6.1 million. Both men, along with other family members, have served on the board of Purdue Pharma, maker of OxyContin, the prescription painkiller widely seen as igniting the opioid crisis. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in September amid mounting federal and state lawsuits.
Downtown, Julie Wainwright, the founder and chief executive of the RealReal, a popular luxury consignment marketplace, closed on an apartment at the Woolworth Tower Residences.
Violaine Etienne, a film producer and longtime partner of Steve Golin, a producer of the Oscar-winning “Spotlight” who died last April, sold her SoHo loft. And Timothy Haynes and Kevin Roberts, interior designers, bought a West Village condominium.
On the Upper West Side, there were co-op sales by the estate of Janet Jeppson Asimov, a writer and psychoanalyst and the wife of the prolific science fiction writer Isaac Asimov, as well as the opera singer Renée Fleming.
A few more apartments also closed at the new 15 Hudson Yards, including a penthouse picked up by Eli Lomita and Alice Sim, racehorse owners in Canada.
Mortimer D.A. Sackler bought his Upper East Side townhouse in 2004 for $15.5 million. He sold the building, which carries around $16,643 in monthly property taxes, in an off-market deal.
The five-story house, with around 11,600 square feet of space, sits in the Upper East Side Historic District, near Fifth Avenue and Central Park. It was erected in 1872 and redesigned in a Beaux-Arts style in 1899.
The new owner, Mr. Englander, known as Izzy, is the billionaire founder of Millennium Management. He has long been active in New York real estate, and in 2014, paid $71.3 million for a corner duplex at 740 Park Avenue, setting a co-op record at the time.
The apartment that Ms. Wainwright bought in the refurbished Woolworth Building, developed by Alchemy Properties at 2 Park Place near Broadway, closed at $6.75 million, a discount from its $7.2 million list price.
The 3,282-square-foot home contains five bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms, and has stunning river and city views, according to the listing with Sotheby’s International Realty. (Oh, and there’s a 13-by-10-foot walk-in closet in the master suite, which means plenty of room to stow a few designer bags and accessories, perhaps sold through the RealReal.)
Ms. Etienne’s loft at 115 Spring Street, an 1878 co-op in the heart of SoHo, sold for $6 million. The buyer was Alexandra Chemla, the founder and chief executive of ArtBinder, a digital platform for galleries, collectors and artists.
The full-floor apartment has more than 3,000 square feet, with three bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms, and it comes with a separate storage room. Although fully renovated, the loft retains much of its 19th-century industrial aesthetic, with soaring ceilings, oversized double-glazed windows, hardwood floors and columns, according to the Compass listing.
Ms. Etienne is a founding partner of Serial Pictures, a film-production company whose work includes music videos for various artists, including Lady Gaga, Madonna and Zayn Malik. In 2014, she shared in a Grammy Award for best music film for a concert film of Paul McCartney.
Mr. Haynes and Mr. Roberts, the design duo, will get to put their creative touches on the new spread they bought for $12.7 million in the north section of 160 Leroy Street.
Their unit encompasses 3,562 square feet, with five bedrooms and four and a half bathrooms, a wood-burning fireplace in the great room and an enormous master suite with an oversized dressing room, according to StreetEasy. The home also offers Hudson River and city vistas.
The 15-story, glassy tower at 160 Leroy Street, near Hudson Street, was designed by the architecture firm Herzog & de Meuron.
The estate of Ms. Asimov sold her five-bedroom, three-and-a-half-bathroom co-op at 10 West 66th Street, a.k.a. the Park Ten, near Central Park West. The closing price was $6 million; the buyers were listed as Alan and Lily Wei Frishman.
The park-facing unit has four bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms, plus ample outdoor space that includes two balconies and a rooftop terrace, according to the listing with Brown Harris Stevens.
Ms. Asimov died in February 2019, 27 years after her husband’s death.
Ms. Fleming, the renowned soprano, got $5.4 million for her penthouse at 200 West 86th Street, an Art Deco apartment house between Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue. It was initially listed for just under $7 million last summer.
The home is a combination of two units that she bought in 2007 for $4.3 million. It has nearly 3,000 square feet of space that includes four bedrooms, an office that could be converted into a fifth bedroom and three and a half bathrooms, according to the listing with Douglas Elliman Real Estate. The apartment is surrounded on three sides by landscaped terraces with cityscape and Hudson River views.
The sale comes months after Ms. Fleming was named an artistic director of the Aspen Music Festival and School in Colorado.
And at Hudson Yards, the first residential building continues to fill up: Mr. Lomita and Ms. Sim, the proprietors of Kingfield Racing Stable of Ontario, Canada, which raises horses for the championship circuit, recently closed on a penthouse there. The price was just under $9.5 million. The unit has three bedrooms, four bathrooms and 2,600 square feet.