Goldman Sachs Is Remaking Itself (Again)
Goldman Sachs is going to do something unusual this week: talk openly with investors.
The 151-year-old investment bank has earned a reputation as the impenetrable (and very profitable) black box of Wall Street. But on Wednesday — in a bid to overcome that secretive mantle and convince the outside world that it is ready for a new era of accountability — Goldman Sachs will open its doors to shareholders, analysts, the media and even regulators for its first “investor day.”
The chief executive, David M. Solomon, is hoping that the event will be an opportunity to show that this isn’t the Goldman Sachs of yore — attempting a makeover of an institution that became known as an adrenaline-fueled sales-and-trading juggernaut but little more than that. Now the firm is angling to handle more mundane services like managing cash for big companies. It has also jumped into retail banking and credit cards.
Attendees are likely to encounter a bit of chest-thumping about Goldman’s historic strengths, namely investment banking and trading, but also a lot of talk about making the firm less opaque. And expect Mr. Solomon, who is active on social media and has a side gig as a DJ (he’ll be spinning at Sports Illustrated’s Super Bowl party in Florida this weekend) to try to humanize the aloof institution, which he took over in the fall of 2018.
“David has got his own shtick and wants to make his own mark,” said Michael Novogratz, a Goldman alumnus who now runs a merchant bank. Plus, with Goldman trying to become a consumer-facing company, Mr. Novogratz added, “it’s good to be household name.”
This is hardly Goldman’s first identity crisis. Over the past three decades, Goldman has regularly encountered leadership and reputational problems — and often tried to reinvent itself in a kinder, gentler image.
Here’s a brief tour.
In 1992, Robert E. Rubin, Goldman’s co-chairman and the brains behind its trading business, left to become an economic adviser to President Bill Clinton. That left Stephen Friedman to run Goldman on his own. By 1994, an unexpected rise in interest rates had caught the firm flat-footed, reportedly diminishing profits by hundreds of millions of dollars. That same year, Mr. Friedman stepped down, blaming the enormous pressures of the job. His successor was Jon S. Corzine, a former government bond trader, and Mr. Corzine’s No. 2 was Henry M. Paulson Jr., a Midwestern investment banker. Together, they would embrace a business model that hinged on traditional investment banking — and aggressive trading.
After friction over Goldman's plans to convert from an employee-owned partnership into a publicly traded company, and another round of trading losses, Mr. Paulson essentially ousted Mr. Corzine over the Christmas holiday in 1998. In the aftermath, Mr. Corzine was so humiliated that he would spend hours sitting in a town car on a street near Goldman’s offices, having his secretary carry documents back and forth, rather than face his colleagues inside.
Four months later, Goldman became the last major Wall Street firm to go public, via a successful stock offering.
Mr. Paulson left in 2006 to become Treasury secretary in the George W. Bush administration. His successor was a former gold salesman, Lloyd C. Blankfein. By 2007, the firm was making nearly a billion dollars in “net revenue” per week, thanks largely to its lightly regulated “proprietary trading” business, in which the firm traded securities for its own accounts.
In the run-up to the financial crisis, Goldman earned billions in profits by betting against the United States housing market. When the September 2008 meltdown forced the firm to accept billions in emergency aid, Goldman became known for a willingness to profit at any price — not a good look for a taxpayer-backed bank during a deep recession.
Late in 2009, Mr. Blankfein made things worse, telling a reporter from The Times of London that he was doing “God’s work.” Five months later, the Rolling Stone writer Matt Taibbi memorably branded Goldman “a great vampire squid wrapped around the face of humanity, relentlessly jamming its blood funnel into anything that smells like money.” That perception was only reinforced in 2010 when American authorities accused Goldman of bilking clients by selling them housing securities bound to plummet in value.
Shortly after that, the firm created a “business standards committee” to help repair its reputation.
Goldman struggled to shed its cowboy image. Greg Smith, a disaffected young London banker, announced his resignation in an Op-Ed in The New York Times in 2012. He wrote that the firm had lost its ethical compass and was routinely taking advantage of its clients.
Meanwhile, Mr. Blankfein’s longtime deputy, a take-no-prisoners trading executive, Gary D. Cohn, was itching for the top job, arguing the need for a new generation of talent. But Mr. Blankfein wasn’t budging, even after a cancer diagnosis, and Mr. Cohn quit to become an economic adviser to President Donald J. Trump.
Mr. Blankfein finally ceded the chief executive job to Mr. Solomon in October 2018. By then, Goldman seemed to have lost its grip atop Wall Street. Goldman’s great pre-crisis profits had never come back. Its stock had slumped compared with rivals like JPMorgan Chase. And Goldman remained under government scrutiny, especially for the lucrative work it had done for a fraudulent Malaysian investment fund, 1MDB.
Mr. Solomon set out to convince the world that Goldman’s future was different from its past. No longer would its operations be shrouded in secrecy, he said. And the bank’s profits would be powered not only by investment banking and trading but also by a range of services for the sorts of smaller customers that the bank traditionally hadn’t bothered with.
Goldman is sending cultural messages, too. Last month, it announced plans to put $750 billion toward initiatives to reduce fossil-fuel use, promote sustainable farming and otherwise help the environment and underserved populations. Mr. Solomon has called for greater gender parity inside Goldman and last week said the bank would press for more boardroom diversity at the companies it advises and invests in.