What’s Going On in This Graph? | Racial Diversity by Neighborhood
These graphs, which show the extent to which U.S. neighborhoods are racially integrated (white and nonwhite) for 1980, 2000 and 2017, appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
After looking closely at the graphs above (or at this full-size image), think about these three questions:
The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order. Start with “I notice,” then “I wonder,” and end with a catchy headline.
2. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment online. Teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students say.)
3. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
On Wednesday, Feb. 5, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, Feb. 7, we will reveal more information about the graphs at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the map differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
Americans are movers. In 2017, about 11 percent of all Americans moved. Historically, Americans move on average 11.4 times in a lifetime. Therefore, it should not surprise us that the composition of our neighborhoods could be changing. Someone moves out and someone, maybe of a different race, moves in. The New York Times published two articles on how neighborhoods are changing. These graphs came from the May 2, 2019 article “Data Shows Decline in Number of White Neighborhoods.” But, the Times also published an article on April 27, 2019 “The Neighborhood Is Mostly Black. The Home Buyers Are Mostly White.” These articles provide a narrative of how our neighborhoods are changing. There are fewer mostly white and mostly nonwhite neighborhoods.
The U. S. Census asks respondents to self-identify by racial category. The data for these graphs is divided into white and nonwhite, which includes everyone who do not self-identify as white. The data is summarized by census tract, which are subdivisions of state counties. Census tracts have an average of 4,000 inhabitants and range from 2,500 to 8,000 residents. Census tracts are one way to define neighborhoods. We will use word neighborhood rather than census tract since it is a more familiar designation of where people live.
How are the graphs for 1980, 2000, and 2017 similar? How are they different? What seems to be happening with all of these moves? Why do you think this is happening? Do you think this trend will continue? What do you predict the 2020 U.S. Census will show regarding the diversity of our neighborhoods?
Here are some of the headlines that really capture the meaning of this graph: ”Is the American ‘Melting Pot’ Mixing Even Further?” by Francesca of Illinois and “Desegregation or Racial Stagnation?” by Tony Kinchen of Ithaca.
You may want to think critically about these questions.
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graphs.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going on in This Graph?” which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data.
Keep noticing and wondering. We continue to welcome your responses.
Join us Wednesday, Feb. 12 to notice and wonder about engagement rings in keeping with Valentine’s Day. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern Time during the live online moderation.
________
To see all previously published Stat Nuggets with links to their graphs, go to this index.
DISTRIBUTION & HISTOGRAM
The distribution of a numerical variable describes how the values of the variable are distributed along the number line. A histogram summarizes the distribution of a numerical variable by showing the number or percentage of the values that fall in specified intervals. The intervals are on the x-axis. Bars drawn above the corresponding intervals represent the number or percentage of values falling in each of the intervals. These numbers or percentages are shown on the y-axis.
In the U.S. neighborhood diversity graphs, the numerical variable is the percentage of a census tract’s population that is white. The x-axis is the white population share, marked in intervals of width 2.5 percent. The frequency of each interval is shown on the y-axis.
NORMAL vs. SKEWED DISTRIBUTION
A normal distribution is symmetric (as if reflected in a mirror) with one peak (or unimodal). Some call it a bell curve due to its shape. A skewed distribution is asymmetric and unimodal with a longer “tail” in the direction of its skew.
In the U.S. neighborhood diversity graphs, none of the distributions are normal. The 1980 distribution is much more skewed left than either the 2000 or 2017 distributions.
_________
The graph for “What’s Going on in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Roxy Peck, professor emerita, California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo, and moderates online with Leah Lynn, high school mathematics teacher at Floyd County College and Career Academy in Rome, Georgia.