J. Charles Jones, Civil Rights Activist, Is Dead at 82
J. Charles Jones, a civil rights activist both in Charlotte, N.C., and nationally who helped organize pivotal events and groups in the 1960s, died on Dec. 27 at his home in Charlotte. He was 82.
His son Michael said the causes were Alzheimer’s disease and sepsis.
Mr. Jones, who came from a family of ministers, was a seminary student at Johnson C. Smith University of Charlotte in early February 1960 when he heard on the radio that four black men had staged a sit-in at a segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter in Greensboro, 90 miles to the northeast.
He had been tracking the emerging civil rights movement throughout the 1950s and saw Greensboro as his personal call to action. At a meeting of his university’s student council on Feb. 8, he and a few others announced that they intended to challenge the segregation at the Charlotte Woolworth’s the next day. They thought a handful of fellow students might join them.
“The next morning there were 216 students outside the administration building,” Mr. Jones said in an oral history recorded in 2005 for Miami University of Ohio. “And we all went downtown in various forms and sat at every lunch counter there.”
Mr. Jones became a spokesman for that protest, one of a number that sprang up across the South; it resulted in the desegregation of many Charlotte lunch counters that summer.
In April 1960, Mr. Jones participated in the meeting at Shaw University in Raleigh, N.C., that resulted in the founding of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. The next year he was one of four people the group sent to Rock Hill, S.C., in support of the so-called Rock Hill Nine, who had been arrested after protesting a segregated lunch counter and had chosen to go to jail and do 30 days on a chain gang rather than post bail — a strategy, known as “Jail, No Bail,” that embarrassed segregationists.
Mr. Jones and the three other S.N.C.C. members were also arrested, and Mr. Jones did his own 30 days.
“Among other things, we made concrete drain pipes and laid them in places where my grandfather, A.A. Jones, had established churches, two churches,” Mr. Jones said in an oral history recorded in 1993 for the Duke University Libraries. “And I felt the culture.”
Later in the 1960s, while a student at Howard University’s law school, where he earned a law degree in 1966, Mr. Jones helped form the Action Coordinating Committee to End Segregation in the Suburbs, known as Access. In June 1966 he led a small group of marchers who, over four days, walked the entire length of the recently completed Washington Beltway, the 64-mile-long highway that encircles the city, to call attention to the problem of suburban landlords who would not rent to black people.
In his later years Mr. Jones often gave talks on the civil rights movement and participated in reunions marking the history-making moments he had experienced firsthand.
“History flowed through Charles Jones,” Tom Hanchett, historian in residence at the Charlotte Mecklenburg Library, said by email. “He seldom spoke without invoking The Elders, the previous generations who had gotten us here and demanded that we keep moving forward. He wanted you to know the civil rights history that his generation had made — so that you would pick up the torch, in turn, and make history yourself.”
Joseph Charles Jones was born on Aug. 23, 1937, in Chester, S.C. His father, J.T., was a Presbyterian minister, and his mother, Ione (Elston) Jones, was an English teacher.
Charles Jones often spoke proudly of the emphasis on education in his family, something he took to heart early. The schoolhouse in Chester, he said, was right across the street from where he lived, and at age 5 he decided he was ready for first grade, although the age requirement was 6.
“So I went on over and took a couple of books and said, ‘I’m ready for school,’” he recalled. The teacher, a Miss Cassell, was amused.
“She said to my mother, ‘Well, it was kind of funny, because Charlie came in,’” Mr. Jones recalled — and one of the books he had brought was “What All Young Expectant Mothers Should Know.”
Miss Cassell let him stay anyway, and for the rest of his education he was a year ahead of his age group.
The family moved to Charlotte in 1947. Mr. Jones earned an undergraduate degree at Johnson C. Smith University in 1958 and pursued theological studies before devoting himself full time to civil rights causes and then switching to a legal career.
In its early days the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee debated whether it should emphasize protests or less flashy means of change, like voter registration. In 1961, Mr. Jones became head of the group’s voter registration wing. Leaving school that summer, he did organizing work in Albany, Ga., and McComb, Miss., among other places. He was arrested several more times.
Later in the 1960s, a high point of Mr. Jones’s work with the Access group was persuading Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara to meet with him  after the Beltway march. He asked the secretary to bring pressure on suburban landlords near military bases, since so many of the soldiers fighting in Vietnam were black. In June 1967, McNamara banned members of the military from renting at any segregated apartment complex near Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland, a major military hub.
Mr. Jones’s first marriage, to Marian Irving, ended in divorce, as did his second, to Joanne Vasco. In addition to his son Michael, from his first marriage, he is survived by his wife, Jackie (Blackwell) Jones; a son, Joseph Charles Jr., and daughter, Ireti Jones Burrell, from his second marriage; and four grandchildren.
In 2003 a group of black and Jewish students from Operation Understanding, a cross-cultural leadership program based in Washington, came through Charlotte as part of a tour. Mr. Jones was asked to address the group.
“To organize together means you can change things,” he told the young people. “And until all of us are safe, none of us are safe.”