$1.2 Million Homes in New York, California and Florida
Built on spec on vacant land in Hudson’s first gated community (dating to the turn of the 20th century), this home is one of several stately houses in the area. It is the last building on its side of a blocklong street, less than five minutes on foot from Warren Street, the city’s boutique- and restaurant-rich commercial stretch. An Amtrak train station is less than half a mile northwest, near the Henry Hudson Riverfront Park. Pennsylvania Station in New York City is two and a quarter hours south.
Size: 2,520 square feet
Price per square foot: $474
Indoors: The sellers, who are the second owners, bought the house in 2009 and made substantial changes. They installed central air-conditioning, opened the second-floor stairwell and landing (which required some structural engineering to remove a load-bearing wall) and updated the kitchen and bathrooms. They also replaced windows, added period-appropriate crown moldings and other millwork and wired several first-floor rooms for sound.
Crossing the colonnaded front porch, you enter a center hall with Brazilian cherry floors that leads past the staircase to the new kitchen. There, you’ll find Smallbone of Devizes hand-painted cabinetry and new appliances, most from Miele. The stovetop is a Lacanche Volnay four-burner that includes a cast-iron simmer plate with a wok ring.
The connected living and dining rooms have cherry floors, 12-foot ceilings and walls painted in a pale gray shade from Farrow & Ball. Each room has a fireplace (gas-burning in the living room, wood-burning in the dining room) with a black marble surround and mantel. The powder room was renovated with a paneled wainscot topped with Art Nouveau-style wallpaper.
Two second-floor bathrooms were combined to create the en suite master bathroom. Striated marble tile covers the walls, continuing into the walk-in shower. The guest bathroom has a shower-over-tub and a pedestal sink.
Outdoor space: French doors lead from the master bedroom and adjacent guest room to the upper front balcony. A rear entrance is approached by a brick walkway through a fenced garden. There is off-street parking for two cars.
Taxes: $17,878
Contact: Pamela Belfor, Gary DiMauro Real Estate, 917-734-7142; garydimauro.com
Offering treetop views in Woodland Hills, in the San Fernando Valley, this one-story stucco-clad house is close to the Ventura Freeway, which takes you southeast into Los Angeles (downtown is 26 miles away). The neighborhood’s central business district is about two miles east, and the city of Calabasas, with a number of shopping and dining options, is just to the west. The 2.1-million-square-foot Westfield Topanga & Village mall, which has luxury stores and restaurants, is about three miles northeast. Hiking and biking trails wind around the almost 3,000 hilly acres of the Upper Las Virgenes Canyon Open Space Preserve, less than four miles northwest.
Size: 2,029 square feet
Price per square foot: $591
Indoors: Entering a bright-red front door and skirting a walnut partition, you find an open-plan room with terrazzo floors, a vaulted ceiling and a rear wall of glass. The living room includes a gas-burning stone fireplace; the kitchen has walnut cabinets and stainless steel appliances.
The owner converted the original master bedroom into an office, and expanded beyond that to create a 500-square-foot master suite with floor-to-ceiling windows and polished concrete floors. A pair of new master bathrooms includes one with a slipper bathtub and another with a walk-in shower.
There are two additional bedrooms and a guest bathroom with retro aqua tile, double sinks and a separate shower and tub. The furniture is available to buy.
Outdoor space: A large covered patio with a grill area extends off the back of the house. The property is entirely fenced (an automated gate with a pedestrian door gives access) and is planted with Meyer lemon, guava and fig trees. Parking is in the attached two-car garage, with additional room for up to 10 cars in the spacious driveway.
Taxes: $14,988 (estimated)
Contact: Casey Napolitano, Kennedy Wilson Real Estate Sales & Marketing, 818-404-5090; kennedywilsonre.idxbroker.com
Before the singer Julio Iglesias Jr. bought this house eight years ago, it was renovated in a sailboat-cabin style, with efficiently designed wood-paneled rooms incorporating many built-ins. The house is in the Meadows neighborhood, in Old Town, five short blocks northwest of Bayview Park and less than a mile east of the historic seaport. The Ernest Hemingway house is about a mile southwest, and Higgs Beach is the same distance southeast. The Basilica of Saint Mary Star of the Sea, with its Our Lady of Lourdes grotto, is about half a mile southwest. Lore has it that the nun who designed the grotto, which was dedicated 98 years ago, prophesied that Key West would never be devastated by a hurricane as long as the structure stood. So far, so good, but flood and wind insurance are still required for mortgage holders of this property.
Size: 1,424 square feet
Price per square foot: $842
Indoors: A paneled living and dining room with an open kitchen are part of the new addition. Glass double doors open from there to a covered porch overlooking the pool. The kitchen has custom Dade County pine cabinets and wood cladding, even on the refrigerator.
Self-contained guest quarters at the front include a bedroom with a loft sleeping area, an office niche, a bathroom, a kitchenette and a private entrance. There is also a bunk room with two sleeping berths off the kitchen.
A spiral staircase rises to a second small office on the landing, and the master suite. The suite includes a bedroom, a sitting room overlooking the pool and a bathroom with a walk-in shower and porcelain pedestal sink. A television positioned above a fireplace between the two main rooms swivels to face either.
The spiral stair continues to a rooftop observation deck, where Mr. Iglesias installed an outdoor shower, steam room and kitchenette.
Outdoor space: The property is entered through a gate set into a stone wall. There is a rocking-chair porch leading to the louvered front door, and tropical greenery surrounding the backyard swimming pool and hot tub. A structure to the side of the pool offers equipment storage and additional covered seating.
Taxes: $7,502 (based on a $700,174 tax assessment)
Contact: Elaine Coyle, Keller Williams Key West Compass Realty, 305-923-9202; compass.com