Iowa Democrats Release Partial Caucus Results, but No Winner Yet
DES MOINES — Democratic officials in Iowa on Tuesday provided a measure of clarity to the muddled outcome of its statewide caucuses, releasing a delayed first wave of partial results that showed Pete Buttigieg and Senator Bernie Sanders with a preliminary lead and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. falling well behind the other top-tier candidates.
The release of the partial data, which accounted for 71 percent of caucus precincts, came after a night and day of suspense, confusion and silence from the Iowa Democratic Party after major problems with its new results reporting system. Even as the party began preparing to release the partial results on Tuesday afternoon, it drew sharp criticism from several campaigns that wanted a complete result, either to have a definitive outcome or frame their Iowa performance in the best possible light.
While the results of Monday night’s caucuses could change with more data, the highly competitive race between Mr. Buttigieg, a moderate, and Mr. Sanders, a liberal, reflected the divisions among Democrats about the ideological direction of the party, and sets up a crucial test for both wings of the party in the New Hampshire primary, on Feb. 11, where Mr. Sanders leads in the polls.
The partial Iowa results also showed Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts in third place, with Mr. Biden trailing her by several points and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota behind him.
Yet there was little evidence in the data released Tuesday that any candidate was on the way to the kind of dominant victory that would have a good chance of transforming the Democratic race. No one appeared on track to receive more than about a quarter of the vote, and five held support in the double digits — a further indication that the Iowa caucuses were unlikely to play a decisive role in deciding the Democratic nominee. Several other candidates, including Andrew Yang and Tom Steyer, registered about 1 percent support or less.
In Iowa, the candidates’ support is measured chiefly in the number of state-level delegates that each amasses, which in turn determines how many delegates they can collect for the Democratic nominating convention next summer. The state party is in the process of releasing popular vote totals as well, though their significance can be diluted in the arcane, multistage caucus process.
In a sign of how uncertain the final outcome remained, Mr. Sanders held a lead over Mr. Buttigieg in the popular vote but trailed him narrowly in the state delegate count, with nearly three quarters of the totals reported. The precinct data was released in two batches, most of it in the late afternoon and then a smaller installment at night, and the state party said it came from across all 99 counties.
It was not immediately clear whether the initial tranche of caucus returns were reflective of the overall dynamics in the state, nor did the state party indicate when the complete results would be available. Several campaigns, including that of Mr. Biden, expressed frustration to state officials earlier on Tuesday with the idea of publicizing a partial data set, amid widespread confusion about the breakdown in reporting the results.
But under pressure to salvage the caucuses from a humiliating logistical debacle, Iowa Democratic leaders decided to go ahead with releasing numbers from a majority of precincts without waiting for the counting process to be completed.
The halting and hectic process in Iowa was an unsightly spectacle for the Democratic Party at the start of its presidential nominating process, offering President Trump an easy target for gloating and ridicule and raising serious questions about whether Iowa would be allowed to retain its first-in-the-nation status in future elections.
Troy Price, the chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party, appeared downcast on Tuesday as he described the process as “unacceptable” in remarks to reporters. “As chair of the party, I apologize deeply for this,” he said.
Mr. Price repeatedly stressed that the data was accurate and said the security of the returns was his “paramount concern.”
The returns posted on Tuesday largely mirrored the scenario that the leading presidential campaigns detected during the caucuses, gathering precinct-level information on their own and in some cases releasing it to the media to make up for the void of hard results.
Should the rest of the Iowa results mostly mirror the data published on Tuesday, it could represent a significant embarrassment for Mr. Biden, who entered the race as a front-runner last spring but has struggled mightily in recent months to compete with fresher-faced and more liberal rivals in both Iowa and New Hampshire. For a period in January, his campaign had grown hopeful that he had a chance of winning Iowa and establishing early dominance, but by caucus night that seemed a remote prospect.
Mr. Biden is aiming to retake control of the race later in February, when the competition moves to Nevada and South Carolina, two far more diverse states long seen as friendly to his candidacy. But first he may have to explain his Iowa slump to the political donors whose support he needs to compete in the larger primary states that vote at the beginning of March.
Mr. Biden’s campaign has said it expected to accrue delegates in Iowa and was bracing for an extended contest.
Yet if Mr. Biden’s dismal standing appeared clear enough, the actual identity of the Iowa winner remained a question mark.
Both Mr. Sanders, of Vermont, and Mr. Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind., have tried to claim an overall victory in the state, and they were too closely matched in the initial returns to declare a single winner. But in New Hampshire on Tuesday, Mr. Buttigieg brandished the available data to once again declare something like victory, and his supporters were encouraged to see his slim edge over Mr. Sanders in state delegates hold up as another installment of results came through close to midnight on the East Coast.
“They’re not complete, but results are in from a majority of precincts and they show our campaign in first place,” Mr. Buttigieg said.
The strength displayed so far by Mr. Sanders and Mr. Buttigieg underscored just how fluid the Democratic race remains, with a 78-year-old democratic socialist who ran for president four years ago deadlocked in Iowa with a 38-year-old former municipal official who was largely unknown a year ago — and both of them substantially ahead of a former two-term vice president.
The result also underscored the divisions on the moderate side of the Democratic Party, with three candidates closer to the political center — Mr. Buttigieg, Mr. Biden and Ms. Klobuchar — collecting a majority of delegate votes so far, but a candidate of the left, Mr. Sanders, still in a position to prevail because of the strength of his progressive base.
The chaos surrounding the caucus process may limit the impact of the Iowa outcome: It is already apparent that, in a departure from past presidential campaigns, no candidate intends to drop out as a result of a disappointing finish in Iowa. Several candidates, including Mr. Biden and Ms. Warren, emphasized on the night of the caucuses that the nomination would be decided over a long process.
And by late afternoon on Tuesday, every major candidate — and a number of lower-profile competitors — had already moved on to New Hampshire, the next state in line, which holds a primary on Feb. 11.
Arriving there on Tuesday afternoon, Mr. Sanders struck a balance between lamenting the procedural breakdowns in Iowa and defending the ultimate significance of the vote there. He eagerly held up his advantage in the popular vote as proof of his strength in the race, also acknowledging the caucuses were “not a good night for democracy.”
“I think we should all be disappointed in the inability of the party to come up with timely results,” Mr. Sanders said. “But we are not casting aspersions on the votes that are being counted.”
Ms. Warren, also campaigning in New Hampshire, said Iowa had to “get it together” and criticized the decision to publish fragmentary results.
“I just don’t understand what that means to release half of the data,” Ms. Warren said in Keene. “So, I think they ought to get it together and release all of the data.”
In Iowa, Mr. Price declined to lay out a timeline for completing the tabulation and releasing the results.
On a midday conference call and in other private conversations with Iowa party leaders, representatives for Mr. Sanders, Mr. Buttigieg, Ms. Warren and Ms. Klobuchar urged local officials to provide the most complete set of results possible, and several campaign emissaries pushed for access to the paper trail that the party was using to verify returns from the caucuses.
Mr. Biden’s campaign took a more combative approach, repeatedly questioning — in public and private — the integrity of the caucuses and objecting to the party’s plans for releasing the results.
“If you put out 50 percent of results, people are going to take that as final,” Jesse Harris, a Biden adviser in Iowa, said on the conference call with the party. “That’s only half. That’s not the total picture of what happened yesterday.”
In an uncharacteristic reversal of roles, it was Jeff Weaver, a senior adviser to Mr. Sanders, who spoke up to defend the Iowa Democratic Party against criticism from the Biden camp on the conference call. Four years ago, it was the Sanders camp that raised alarm about the reliability of Iowa’s opaque results, in a clash that yielded a more complex set of data-reporting requirements that appear to have snarled the state party this time around.
But Mr. Weaver suggested that those raising the sharpest objections this time had ulterior motives.
“I do want to urge people in the interest of not discrediting the party,” he said, “that folks who are just trying to delay the return of this because of their relative positioning in the results, last night, I think that’s a bit disingenuous.”
Caucuses are largely a relic of the past, and Democratic Party rules prodded all but a few states to switch this year to holding straightforward primary elections. Democratic leaders in two states that still use the caucus system, Nevada and North Dakota, made statements on Tuesday distancing themselves from the fiasco in Iowa.
“I am 100% confident that what happened in Iowa will not happen in Nevada,” Harry Reid, the former Senate Democratic leader from Nevada, said on Twitter.