‘I Had Shoved Everything I Needed Into a Rickety Folding Cart’
Dear Diary:
I was breaking up with my boyfriend.
I had shoved everything I needed into a rickety folding cart that I had wheeled it into our building’s elevator when my ex came running down the hall. He held the doors open, arguing with me for a really long time.
I wasn’t the only one in the elevator. A man trapped there with me politely pretended that a relationship wasn’t collapsing in front of him.
The doors finally closed and we went outside. I apologized. He pulled out two cigarettes, handed me one and stood next to me, smoking.
We didn’t speak or even look at each other. We just stood there shoulder to shoulder for a few minutes while I pulled myself together. Then he flicked his butt and walked away.
— Miranda McLeod
Dear Diary:
I was walking home when I found a car key and fob on the sidewalk. Wanting to return the key to its rightful owner, I clicked the fob to see whether the car it belonged to was parked nearby.
It was, just up the block and directly in front of my own car. Its rear bumper was nearly touching my front one.
My rear bumper was close to a hydrant. The car was probably O.K. where it was, but it was in the kind of spot that might it earn a ticket from an officer in the wrong mood.
Meanwhile, the car in front of mine — the one I was holding the keys to — had a glorious four feet of space in front of it.
As I continued on to my apartment, I considered whether I should use the key I had just picked up to move the car in front of mine so that I could secure myself a little more space and ensure that I would not get a ticket.
I won’t tell you what I decided. I’ll let you debate the issue, as my wife and I still do months later.
— Benjamin Marcus
Dear Diary:
With every stop of the train, more passengers surged in than filed out. And with every stop of the train, I was nudged farther and farther into the car.
I eventually found myself facing a woman who had her back to the door and her chin dropped to her chest. A two-lane highway of gray ran over the crown of her head. To either side was a fading chestnut brown.
The woman looked up and into my eyes.
“Do you think I should stop dying my hair?” she said.
“Yes,” I replied after an appropriate two-second assessment. “I do.”
“Are you sure?” she asked. “What about the color of my skin? Would it look O.K. with gray hair?”
“It will look beautiful,” I said after another quick assessment.
“Are you sure?” the woman asked a second time.
“Yes,” I said. “You will look beautiful.”
We pulled into the next station and the doors opened behind her. She thanked me, turned and walked away.
— Rebecca Kalin
Dear Diary:
In December 1979, I returned home to New York as the only passenger on a Brazilian freighter after a 13-month stay in Rio de Janeiro.
Unlike the 12-day voyage down, the return trip had lasted more than a month, resulting in a broken promise I had made to my girlfriend that I would be home in time for Christmas.
When the M.V. Netuno finally sailed into New York Harbor on Dec. 30, I ran up on deck to get a good look at the Statue of Liberty and my beloved hometown before the tugs came to tow us to the dock.
Then I heard the anchor being dropped, and my heart began to sink. Down on the bridge, the ship’s captain took me aside.
“I’m terribly sorry,” he said, “but it’s too expensive to have our cargo offloaded on a Sunday, so we’re going to remain anchored here in the bay till tomorrow morning.”
I don’t remember getting much sleep that night, but I’ll never forget how the sun shone on the buildings of Lower Manhattan as we made our way up the East River to Pier 36 the next day.
— Dan Donaghy
Dear Diary:
A friend of mine was visiting from Oklahoma. She had been to New York many times and had seen the major attractions, so I decided to take her to Coney Island.
We went on the Wonder Wheel, got a hot dog at Nathan’s and made our way over to the Brooklyn Cyclones’ baseball field to watch a game.
While we were in the stands, a peanut vendor passed by.
“Sir, sir,” my friend called out, “excuse me.”
She got no response.
I stopped her and said she should yell “Yo, peanuts” as loud as she could.
She did.
The vendor turned around immediately.
“How many?” he said.
— Annette Angelone
Read all recent entries and our submissions guidelines. Reach us via email diary@nytimes.com or follow @NYTMetro on Twitter.