What’s on TV Thursday: ‘Grace and Frankie’ and ‘Grown-Ish’
GRACE AND FRANKIE Stream on Netflix. Lily Tomlin eats takeout noodles with a pair of tongs. Jane Fonda alternates between sips of a margarita and a shot of tequila. These are a couple of the charmingly indulgent things that happen in the new, penultimate season of this warm comedy series. “Grace and Frankie” stars Fonda and Tomlin as frenemies who become inseparable after their husbands (played by Martin Sheen and Sam Waterston) fall in love with each other. One of the main story lines in the new season involves Fonda and Tomlin’s characters inventing a device meant to help people lift themselves off toilet seats.
ALADDIN (2019) Stream on Disney Plus; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. Aladdin, Jasmine and the singing blue Genie got a whole new multimillion-dollar budget to tell their story in this live-action remake of Disney’s 1992 cartoon musical, based on a story from “The One Thousand and One Nights.” The new version casts relative newcomers — Mena Massoud and Naomi Scott — as the street thief Aladdin and Princess Jasmine, whose love story is accompanied by some new music from Benj Pasek and Justin Paul, the songwriting duo behind “Dear Evan Hansen.” Massoud and Scott are also accompanied by Will Smith, who takes various digital forms as the wish-granting Genie. All of them are bizarre. (Smith’s genie, Massoud told The New York Times last year, has “a little bit of ‘Hitch’ in it; it’s got a little bit of ‘Bad Boys’ in it; a little bit of ‘The Pursuit of Happyness’ — it’s got a little bit of everything.”) In his review for The Times, A.O. Scott wrote that this “Aladdin” update “may not be the worst product of the current era of legacy intellectual property exploitation (it’s likely that the worst is yet to come), but like most of the others it invites a simple question: Why?”
GROWN-ISH 8 p.m. on Freeform. In Thursday night’s episode of “grown-ish,” Zoey Johnson, the eldest child in the family at the center of ABC’s “black-ish,” heads into her third year of college — and her third season as the subject of her own spinoff show. In the previous season, Zoey (Yara Shahidi) navigated a year that ended with a consequential kiss. The new season begins with a junior year homecoming party.
NEW YORK, NEW YORK (1977) 8 p.m. on TCM. The year after he starred in Martin Scorsese’s “Taxi Driver,” Robert De Niro traded his handguns for a saxophone, playing a musician in love in “New York, New York,” Scorsese’s jazzy musical. The film’s plot follows a saxophonist (De Niro) and a pop singer (Liza Minnelli) who fall in love. TCM is showing it alongside Scorsese’s MEAN STREETS (1973), airing at 11 p.m., which finds the director on more familiar, gangster-held ground. Those who saw “The Irishman” and want to see De Niro play a young criminal without the aid of digital effects can turn here.