Stories to Sweep You Away: Our New Feature, The Great Read
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
The Times publishes an astonishing amount of stuff every week, and that’s because we know our readers come to us with an astonishing array of interests. All of you want to stay informed about the biggest news of the day, but some of you also want to go deep on specific passions of yours, whether theater or physics, investing or football, pop music or gadgets. We give you recipes to cook, puzzles to solve, advice on what to buy. We don’t expect anyone to read every word we publish in print and online — besides, it’s almost impossible — but our goal is that all our readers can find enough of what they love to keep coming back, day after day.
For me, as a longtime reader — and now, for the past five years, as an editor here — I’ve always come for the great storytelling. But that’s not something you find in just one section of The Times. It’s true that the part I work on, The New York Times Magazine, devotes itself to publishing a few in-depth pieces of narrative writing every week. But if you read widely throughout The Times, you know that every single department, from the newshounds at National and Metro to the epicures of Dining to the rarefied intellects of Books and beyond, will regularly find a fascinating tale to tell you: some character study, or scenic dispatch, or heartfelt personal essay that you can’t help reading all the way to the end.
That’s why I’m thrilled to be introducing The Great Read, a new, highly curated digital home for great writing from all around The Times. If you read us online, you may have noticed it already, near the top of the home page every weekday: one feature story that you can read at lunchtime, or on the train after work, or at bedtime, drawn from a wide variety of desks and covering a wide variety of subjects.
What makes a “great read,” in my eyes? It’s certainly not length — one of the first Great Reads we picked was just shy of 900 words, a lovely Science dispatch from an observatory in Armenia. Instead, it’s about sustained storytelling, about showing readers a person or a place not merely as a jumping-off point for breaking news or explanation but as a destination in itself.
The inaugural Great Read in our project, by Ellen Barry, was a splendid case in point: a report from Old Town, Maine, pop. 7,500, describing what happened when a mysterious Chinese company came to town and bought up the struggling paper mill. Sure, Ms. Barry’s story takes place against the backdrop of a host of larger issues: the Trump administration’s trade war with China, the political tides of rural America, the convulsions of a postindustrial economy, all of which she nods at in the telling of her tale.
But ultimately, she and her editors had the confidence to let it be a tale, to let it follow the odd twists and turns that only real life can supply: the seven Buddhist monks who come to sanctify the mill, the feng shui consultant (“Feng Shui Eddie”) called in to worry about the spirits that might spring forth from the local cemetery. Many news stories use narrative anecdotes on the way to making bigger points, but with Great Reads, it’s the opposite: The narrative is the point, and the best lessons that emerge tend to be the ones that are shown rather than told, the unpredictable truths of human experience.
Whatever you look for in The Times each day, I hope you will pause over the coming weeks and months to take a look at The Great Read. Sometimes the story will be fun, like the recent profile of a Chicago chef who wants to chuck it all to start an inn in the wilds of Michigan. Sometimes it will be twisty and complex, like the recent Business story about an enormous tax fraud scheme in Europe. Or heartbreaking and human, like the magazine’s recent cover story about a daughter’s quest to find her parents after they disappeared into a Uighur re-education camp in China. But I hope that all the stories will take you somewhere you were not expecting to go — and that you will find the journey to be a worthy one.