Balancing Being a Surgeon and a Mother
To the Editor:
Re “When the Surgeon Is a Mom” (Science Times, Dec. 31):
As a past president of the Association of Women Surgeons, I was disappointed by this article.
The vignette at the beginning portrays women surgeons who are mothers in a very negative way. The idea that “desperate mothers” take sick children to day care by giving them Tylenol to reduce their fever is unsettling. The reporter does not take into account that this woman is a physician who would be able to assess the gravity of her child’s fever and make a responsible decision.
Furthermore, she is then described as not giving an operation her full attention because she is checking the clock, worried about picking up her son in time. If this is true, it is unacceptable. In the operating room, all surgeons must and do concentrate all their attention on the surgery they are performing.
This article revives outdated stereotypical ideas that women cannot be competent professionals and good mothers. My 50 years of experience with countless women surgeons has demonstrated the baselessness of that supposition. More than half of the physicians graduating from medical school are women. We must help enable them to be good doctors as well as have good family lives. They need not sacrifice the well-being of their families to live up to their responsibilities to their patients.
M. Margaret Kemeny
New York
To the Editor:
Both my parents were highly regarded surgeons. I grew up with seven siblings. My reconstructive surgeon mother started her practice in the 1950s. The challenges she faced in launching and sustaining her career were titanic, the help, little to none. Suffice it to say that certain aspects of child rearing took a back seat.
My siblings and I raced a lot of wheelchairs around the emergency room while she sewed people back together. We saw Dad on weekends, sometimes. They did their best.
Only at the end of the article was the impact on the child mentioned. This bothered me. Without the right support for surgeons who choose to become mothers, the results can range from problematic to devastating. To say the family made sacrifices would be to put it mildly. I didn’t get the eyeglasses I needed (my first-grade teacher reported that I could not see the blackboard) until I was 15 and I went to get them for myself.
I know my parents loved us. My mother was my hero. In many ways we were quite privileged. Nonetheless, the consequences of their choices had a long-term impact on my ability to find my way in life. Sometimes my parents’ best wasn’t very good. I count myself lucky, though. At least I did not end up homeless as one of my brothers did.
Pamela Hudson
New City, N.Y.
To the Editor:
“When the Surgeon Is a Mom” seems to suggest that the surgical profession should adapt in order to accommodate the needs of moms who also want to dedicate their time and energy to being primary caregivers to their children. I would like to voice my concern about this entitled attitude.
Being a surgeon is, and should be, a very demanding profession no matter how it is structured, as is being a primary caregiver to a child. I don’t believe that women are “owed” the right to be able to be successful at two very demanding concurrent roles (both of which require being “on call”) any more than men are.
It is wonderful that more women are becoming surgeons, but it is appropriate that they are subject to the same choices that everyone else must make, prioritize their time and energy, and sacrifice that which is less important to them.
Jean Cook
Boston