‘Sing Street’ to Bring Irish Romance and ’80s Sounds to Broadway
“Sing Street,” a new musical about a group of Dublin schoolboys who find their voices by forming a band, will transfer to Broadway this spring.
The musical, now running Off Broadway at New York Theater Workshop, will begin performances March 26 and open April 19 at the Lyceum Theater, which, with just over 900 seats, is among the smaller Broadway houses.
“Sing Street,” like many Broadway musicals, began its life as a film: a 2016 Irish romantic comedy written and directed by John Carney.
The stage version has a book by Enda Walsh, an Irish playwright who won a Tony Award for “Once,” which he also adapted from a Carney film. The musical is being directed by Rebecca Taichman, who won a Tony for “Indecent,” and choreographed by Sonya Tayeh, who also oversees the dance in this season’s “Moulin Rouge!”
The “Sing Street” score is made up of nine songs written for the movie by Carney and Gary Clark (including one that was cut from the film), as well as fragments of ’80s pop songs (including “Rio,” a Duran Duran song also used in the film).
The Off Broadway production has sold well, but got mixed reviews from critics; Ben Brantley, writing in The New York Times, called it “promising but still unfulfilled.”
Taichman said on Tuesday that the creative team was already at work revising the show.
“We’re looking at a lot of things — among them, how to nail the tone of the piece exactly right, and how to explode the world of New Romantics and synthesizers and 1980s pop music into the room more,” she said. “We have listened to the wonderful audiences we’ve had, and have learned a tremendous amount, and we are now thrilled to have the opportunity to make the show better.”
The musical is being produced by Barbara Broccoli, Brian Carmody, Patrick Milling Smith, Michael Wilson, Orin Wolf and Frederick Zollo; it is being capitalized for up to $11 million, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Sing Street” is the 10th new musical announced for the current Broadway season.