Your Friday Briefing
When the sun rises over Britain on Saturday, the country will no longer be part of the European Union.
The issue of whether to stay or leave has already divided British families, cast a shadow over businesses and paralyzed the government, writes our London bureau chief, Mark Landler. And the trade talks that Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s government will have with the bloc’s leaders in the coming months could prove just as traumatic.
But for now, Mark writes, the prevailing emotion in the United Kingdom is a characteristically British reflex: Get on with it.
Another angle: Pro-Europe “remainers” are girding for new battles over how Brexit will affect trade and immigration, among other issues. Some of them see the American left’s response to President Trump’s 2016 election victory as a useful model.
Closer look: The E.U. gave a final seal of approval to the withdrawal agreement on Thursday in a way that was quintessentially Brussels: bureaucratic and undramatic.
Finer points: Because the European Union dictates Britain’s departure, Brexit will be official at the stroke of midnight, Brussels time, which is only 11 p.m. in London.
Nobody has died from the Wuhan coronavirus outside mainland China, where the death toll rose today to 213. Yet more than a dozen countries are isolating patients and screening travelers from China as a wave of panic spreads. Here are the latest updates.
Some responses to the virus, which has sickened nearly 10,000 people, mostly in China, can be seen as rational calculations based on the risk of infection. Others are xenophobic and feed off latent bigotry linked to China’s rise as a global power, our Tokyo bureau chief writes.
World Health Organization: The agency declared the outbreak a global health emergency on Thursday, citing fears that the coronavirus may reach countries with weak health care systems.
Related: After thousands of passengers were blocked from leaving a cruise ship docked north of Rome over concerns that someone aboard might have had the virus, Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte of Italy said that his country had blocked all flights to and from China. The United States also issued a “do not travel” to China advisory, and Russia ordered the closing of its 2,600-mile border with China, starting today.
Opinion: Ian Johnson, an author who has lived in the Chinese capital for more than 20 years, writes in an Opinion piece that the government’s “inability to formulate a measured response” will make the current outbreak a direct successor of the SARS epidemic.
President Trump’s impeachment trial may end as soon as today — but only if Republicans can muster enough votes to block witness testimony.
As of late Thursday, they appeared to have the margin they’d need, although Democrats were hinting at a last-minute gambit to frustrate their plans. Here’s the latest.
Above, a sketch artist’s view of the trial, which is closed to cameras that are not operated by government employees.
Analysis: The Republicans have offered multiple rationales for refusing fresh testimony, but our chief Washington correspondent says they’re worried that hearing from John Bolton, the former national security adviser, would lead to a cascade of other witnesses.
Background: Mr. Bolton’s coming book corroborates a central piece of the case against Mr. Trump over his pressure campaign in Ukraine.
Profile: Mitt Romney, a former presidential candidate, is one of two Republican senators pushing for witnesses in the trial.
President Emmanuel Macron’s En Marche party declined to make the mathematician Cédric Villani its candidate for the Parisian mayoral election in March.
But Dr. Villani, above center, is running anyway as a dissident candidate. His platform promotes information technology, and he notes that the city’s first elected mayor, in 1789, was also a mathematician.
“Politics is where rationality and irrationality meet,” said Dr. Villani, a deputy in the country’s National Assembly. “As well as passion.”
Sexual abuse: A French appeals court on Thursday overturned a ruling against Cardinal Philippe Barbarin, the archbishop of Lyon, who had been convicted last year of covering up decades-old sexual abuse by a priest in his diocese. Cardinal Barbarin served none of his suspended six-month sentence.
Kobe Bryant crash: The company that owned the helicopter that crashed into a fogbound mountainside on Sunday, killing the basketball legend and eight others, did not have certification for its pilots to fly in poor visibility, sources familiar with the company’s operations told The Times.
Deutsche Bank: The German bank, once Europe’s largest by assets, said it had lost a total of €5.3 billion in 2019. It’s fighting to recover from years of scandal and mismanagement that have caused its share price to plummet more than 90 percent since 2007.
The Guardian: The newspaper said it would no longer accept advertisements from oil and gas companies, making it one of the latest institutions to limit financial ties to the fossil fuel industry.
Snapshot: Above, kayaking in Florida’s Everglades National Park. In an essay for our Travel section, the journalist Nina Burleigh explains how the low-lying area is threatened by rising sea levels. “I’ve traveled far but never found a place where the Garden of Eden and the Fall of Man are so palpable in one place,” she writes.
Brad Pitt: Our film critic explores how the actor embodies “contemporary masculinity and its contradictions.”
U.S. politics quiz: The Democratic primary season for the 2020 presidential election begins on Feb. 3 and lasts until early June. Take our quiz to see which candidate could be your match.
What we’re reading: This essay in Cleveland Magazine. Stephen Hiltner, an editor on the Travel desk, writes: “Dave Lucas, Ohio’s poet laureate, ruminates on the beauty and the mystery of Lake Erie’s annual freeze.”
Cook: Sausage and peppers pasta with broccoli riffs on a classic Italian combination.
Go: Terra-cotta and wood sculptures form the “visual and emotional heart” of an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York about the history and cultural heritage of kingdoms on the Sahara’s rim, our art critic writes.
Read: In “A Woman Like Her,” the journalist Sanam Maher explores the society that enabled and applauded the murder of Pakistan’s first social media star, Qandeel Baloch.
Smarter Living: When donating to environmental organizations, it can be hard to figure out who’s actually making a difference. Here’s what to look for.
On Sunday night, around 100 million people are expected to tune in for the ultimate American  party: the Super Bowl. But with growing concern over the violence of American football, what are the ethics of watching the biggest sporting event of the year? Our culture critics have their own take, and here’s what Ken Belson, who has been reporting on C.T.E., the degenerative brain disease linked to repeated hits to the head, told our Briefings teammate Remy Tumin.
What keeps fans coming back?
It’s an event that transcends the sport. The N.F.L. has been brilliant in turning it into a spectacle, and there’s nothing like it. That’s partly because of how the league has structured it — one final game, winner takes all, in a neutral city, on the first Sunday of February, every year. Other sports don’t have the same permanency.
You’ll be watching from the Hard Rock Stadium in Miami. What can you see that viewers can’t?
Often when there’s an injury timeout, they go to commercial. I’ll be able to see doctors tending to players, including a neuro-trauma consultant who is on the sidelines (and wears a red hat). If you see the consultant get involved, it means someone has had a concussion.
What would you say to fans who are having moral issues?
It’s a collision sport at heart, and if you don’t want see it, turn on something else. If you can’t reconcile that violence, and it is violence, then there are many other sports. I think it’s O.K. to watch it and have misgivings. It’s human nature — you can both admire and be horrified by the same thing.