‘American Oligarchs: The Kushners, the Trumps and the Marriage of Money and Power,’ by Andrea Bernstein: An Excerpt
A few years before half of the family was murdered, the Kushners, as they usually did, took a summer vacation in the tiny town of Novoyl’na, then part of Poland. Amid the sharp scents of pine and spruce, and fresh water from the lake, the Kushner children played in the forest. On Friday evenings, as the late-setting sun angled through the woods, the family gathered for Shabbat dinner. Parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, aunts, uncles, cousins sat in front of tall white candles to eat chicken soup, sweet kugel, the ever-present braided challah bread. “Summer camp” was how the surviving Kushners would later describe these trips. “Camping” and “going to camp” were among their fondest memories.
There’s a picture that endures from one of these summers. The lower left corner is burnt, or chemically disappeared. But the image in the center is clear: a family of four children arrayed on a hammock around their father, tall trees standing like sentries in the background. The father is wearing light-colored, loose-fitting pants, neatly cuffed, a white shirt, dark tie. His hands are on his knees, his expression neutral. All the children look happy, relaxed; the younger ones, impish, even.
There’s Esther in her late teens on the far left wearing a short-sleeved, close-fitting white button-down shirt, parted sharply with a dark tie.
[ Return to the review of “American Oligarchs.” ]
Next to her is Lisa in a loose-fitting dress. In the photo, she’s a preteen, skinny legs dangling over the hammock. On the other side of their father sits Chanon Kushner, not much older than Lisa, in short pants, a long-sleeved shirt, a goofy grin. And on the right, her hand draped behind her brother’s back and resting on her father’s shoulder: teenage Reichal “Rae” Kushner. Her thick black hair cut in a bob, Rae is smiling. Her face, like everyone else’s in her family, is unworried, unlined. Her dark brown eyes gaze forthrightly into the camera, yet to witness any horrors. Most of the year, the family lived in the commercial town of Novogrudok, Poland, population twenty-five thousand. There is a record of those years, left by Rae herself in two videotaped testimonies of her wartime experiences; other oral histories were supplied by her sister, Lisa, and fellow Novogrudok survivors. Life in those years was good. Naum Kushner—the last name means “furrier”—sold hats and “beautiful ladies’ coats” in his two shops to a mostly Jewish clientele. His wife, Hinda, helped with the business, and for household chores, the family had a maid. All four children went to private schools; Esther had completed college, and Rae had matriculated in a prestigious university in Kraków for part of her schooling. The Kushners attended the town’s biggest shul, dressing in their finest on Fridays for the walk to synagogue. There was a robust civil society: Jews in Novogrudok funded a hospital, an orphanage, a Jewish home for the aged. There was commerce; there was culture, a regular diet of Jewish theater. “You were free,” Lisa Kushner Reibel later said. “And everything was all right.”
Half a decade after the photograph was taken, three of six members of the Kushner family would be dead. Of hundreds of cousins, grandparents, sisters and brothers, uncles and aunts, only a handful, including Lisa, Rae, and their father, Naum, made it through—through the destruction of their home and the confiscation of their business; through family separations and multiple mass executions, starvation, lice, beatings, forced labor, German dogs, and Nazi bullets; past barbed wire; through months of hiding in the forest, braving the Polish winter, a trek across international borders, and years in a displaced persons camp. The Kushners lost everything. The photo survived.
Situated between three historic powers, 1930s Poland had endured a century of Prussian, Russian, and Austro-Hungarian incursion. The Treaty of Versailles redrew its borders once again, but through the agreement Poland achieved a tentative independence after World War I. Its Jewish population swelled. By the 1930s, Polish Jews numbered three million.
Novogrudok was in northeast Poland close to the Soviet border, in what is now Belarus. About half of the residents were Jewish. The rest were Poles, and Belarusians, or “White Russians.” The national idea of “Poland” held little allure for Jews in Novogrudok, some of whom looked to a different country altogether, one that for the moment existed only in their imaginations: Israel. The Jews of Novogrudok spoke Polish, Russian, Yiddish, and Hebrew, but there was a popular Zionist saying: “Atah Ivrit, t’daber Ivrit” or “You are a Hebrew, speak Hebrew”—the language of the Holy Land.3 There were even Zionist political parties in Novogrudok, including one for those who advocated taking over Palestine by peaceful means, by buying up land, and another, by the rifle. Still—in the 1930s, the state of Israel was just a dream, and getting papers to emigrate to the area arduous. A thousand kilometers away, in Berlin, Adolf Hitler was consolidating power. His anti-Semitic screed, Mein Kampf, was a bestseller. If you were a Polish Jew in the 1930s, there were barriers to migration to almost anywhere. Including the United States.
In Novogrudok, in those days, “we didn’t know so much,” Rae told an interlocutor from Kean University in 1982. “There used to come a holiday, they used to say to Jews, ‘Go to Palestine, you don’t have a place here,’ but we didn’t pay attention.” Rae said this was a small group of people.
On August 23, 1939, when Rae was sixteen, Adolf Hitler and Josef Stalin’s foreign ministers signed a pact, once again carving up Poland. Novogrudok became part of the Soviet Union. But rather than run from their new conquerors, middle-class Jews met the Russians with bunches of flowers. “It is either to accept Russia, or to accept the Germans,” Rae’s fellow survivor Jack Kagan, the son of a saddle maker who resettled in London, said in his testimony. “The Germans we couldn’t accept. So, whatever came as a substitute, for us it was a tremendous thing.”
Soviet rule came with its compromises. The Soviets enrolled schoolchildren in the “Pioneers” program—a social group designed to encourage children to inform on their parents. Children who weren’t members, maybe five in a class of thirty, were ostracized.
Sonya Oshman, another Novogrudok survivor, a former medical student who moved to New York, spoke in 1988 about being asked to serve as a “translator” for the Soviet secret police, the NKVD. “They wanted to, you know, to engage me into spying. I know you start with them with a little thing, with translations, and then I would go on and on and on and on and on. And this was very scary.” Fearing she would be thrown in jail, Oshman declined. She was allowed to go free, but with strict instructions not to tell her parents. If she did, the Soviet officer speaking with her warned, “It’s going to be like that”: a finger pulled across the throat. “That’s exactly what he showed me,” Oshman said.
The Kushners, too, soon chafed at Russian rule. The Soviets nationalized all the shops, including the Kushners’ fur stores, and began to put the richer people on cattle trains to Siberia. At the time, this seemed the worst option possible. One Saturday, word spread among the wealthier families that the Soviets were coming that night. Rae’s mother, Hinda, hid her children in different houses of poorer people. The Russians came that evening, as expected, but found no one at the Kushner home. It was the first of Rae Kushner’s many, many escapes.
At the time, the Kushners exhaled. Later, Rae was sorry. She wished the Russians had taken her whole family. She considered those who were taken to Siberia to be the lucky ones. “But who knew there’s going to come Germany?” Rae asked, in her Yiddish-inflected English. “And it’s going to be so bitter for us.”
They had been warned. Jews from South Poland came to Novogrudok. They said the Germans were killing Jews. But the Jews in Novogrudok didn’t believe them. They asked themselves: What kind of people would do that?
Two years after the Hitler-Stalin pact, Rae would see for herself. In June 1941 Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa, his grand push to seize Moscow, for which he deployed an army of more than three million troops, six hundred thousand vehicles, and another six hundred thousand horses. Novogrudok was bombed, cratering homes, leaving bodies strung along downed electric lines. The Soviets quickly fled, abandoning the population of Novogrudok, and its thousands of Jews, to the Nazis.
At first, things didn’t seem so bad. Yes, Jews were issued yellow stars; they were not allowed to use sidewalks and were instead relegated to the middle of the street. They could still go about their business.
In July 1941, the Nazis rounded up the town’s intellectuals: the well-educated, the doctors—its professional class. Some thought the Germans were going to give them jobs. “So, some went, ‘If they want me, I’ll go,’ ” Lisa Reibel said. They were brought to the town square, where an orchestra was playing. But they did not get job assignments. Instead, fifty of these Jews were lined up in the market square and machine-gunned, face to face, “so I can see the way he is shot and he can see the way he is shot,” as Lisa put it, betraying with her syntax that she had learned English after Yiddish, Polish, Hebrew, and German. All fifty were killed. One moved a little after he was shot, “so they killed him again.”
Rae herself had been ordered to the square, along with the “fifty nicest looking girls,” whom the Germans had enlisted for a grim cleanup duty. “The blood was running on the square on the stones,” as Rae described it. The fifty girls were told to wash it off. “We helped to put the bodies on the wagon,” Rae said. “Their heads were hanging, from the dead people, and we knew the people. And the music was playing and we washed the stones from the square.” The Germans were having a dance in the square.
But Jewish witnesses to the killing were few, according to Sonya Oshman, who was herself in hiding. The next day a friend of hers was seized and gang-raped by Nazi soldiers, left for dead.
The Germans spread the story the Jews were murdered in the square because they had collaborated with the retreating Soviet army. The Jews thought the fifty were killed because they were the most likely to organize a rebellion against the Nazis.
Even after fifty people had been murdered, some Jews in Novogrudok rationalized what had happened. “There was no resistance,” Jack Kagan recalled. “We could have escaped. We could have done whatever we wanted during this period of time. But at the same time we didn’t know what was coming. We knew the time will be difficult. We knew it will be hunger; maybe it will be tough. Maybe we will be beaten or we will work in camps . . . But we did not know that our lives will be at risk. Okay they will shoot fifty people out of a population of seven thousand. That’s just bad luck and so on that they have been caught.” The human mind resists accepting the possibility of awful outcomes. The Jews of Novogrudok had now seen atrocities; many would die because they could not imagine worse.
The denialism, too, soon ended. On December 5, 1941, one of the coldest days of the year, the Nazis put up handbills: there was an immediate curfew. No Jews were allowed to leave their homes. The next day, they were commanded to register at the town courthouse, bringing only what they could carry. Herded by Nazi soldiers, who baited the Jews with promises that the talented people and those who could work would get double portions of bread, some seven thousand were led to the courthouse, a white stone building with pane-glass windows, a sweeping staircase, and smooth octagonal floor tiles, “like the courthouse in Elizabeth,” New Jersey, as Rae described it. Once there, they were forced to stand for hours in the frigid courtyard before eventually being let inside. All six Kushners passed that night together, huddled with their neighbors against the cold and brittle fear.
The trucks arrived. The Nazis entered the courthouse, with their crisp uniforms and white-gloved hands directing the crowds: “You to the right, and you to the left.” To the right meant to die, to the left to live. Elderly people and children, toddlers, babies, were sent to the right. “They were screaming and children crying, little infants, you know, month old, two months, a year old . . . they took away the children and the mothers they told to go on the other side. Could you imagine the cruelty?” Oshman asked. Children were ripped from their parents’ arms, tossed like rocks into the trucks. Some mothers refused to turn over their children. They were killed instantly.
A rumor went through the queues: these people were being taken to “special places” where they would work, get food, get clothing. “When you are very desperate or whatever and somebody tells you something, so maybe you believe it might be like that,” Oshman said. “You could not imagine that they were going to take the people that they didn’t do anything and just kill them,” Oshman said. But it started to become clear. If a white-gloved Nazi hand pointed to the right, it meant you were going to die.
The Kushners were told to go to the right. Hinda Kushner, Rae’s mother, started to scream. Rae went up to a German and told him “I’m young, I want to live, I want to work. Leave us on the other side.” But the Nazi kicked her in the behind with his black boot and walked away as she tumbled down the stairs. The family was forced to throw into a pot all the valuables they had stowed in their pockets—“rings, jewelry, money”—before they themselves were ejected into the square into the din: “rabbis, young women holding babies by their breasts, old men and women screaming and praying to God.” They were crying “Shema Yisrael”—hear me, Israel, the eternal is our God—the most central and holy of Jewish prayers. They watched as trucks left, loaded with Jews.
Rae’s family was next. But it took time to load up the trucks. While they were waiting on line, Hinda exhorted her older daughter, “Run! Run! They’re going to be killed all, maybe one from you is going to be alive.” Esther, wearing a fur coat, ran into the building where the Nazis were gathering Jews who had not been immediately condemned. But a Polish police officer, a former school friend, saw her, stripped her of her coat, and dragged her back to the trucks.
While Esther was being detained, the Nazis came to the line and asked if there were any furriers. Hinda stepped out of the line and announced that her husband was a furrier. And so her family was saved, taken back into the courthouse. All except Esther, who was carted off in a truck to the edge of town. There, a mass grave had been dug, and the Jews were ordered to climb in it, so when the machine guns started firing, they would already be in the burial pit. Five thousand Jews died this way, among them Rae’s older sister, Esther Kushner.
In the liquidation of December 1941, in Novogrudok, the Nazis killed the old and the very young, five thousand out of a population of seven thousand, sparing only those who they thought would be efficient workers—able-bodied men and women under forty who could be enslaved to the German war machine. They were forced, as Oshman put it, to clothe and “feed an army.” To defy was to die. The Kushner family lost the wealth of generations: their home, their businesses, their candlesticks, their fur coats, their jewelry. They survived because of their tradecraft, because they could make hats for German soldiers mounting a winter campaign on the Soviet Union.
[ Return to the review of “American Oligarchs.” ]
After the massacre, the Jews who had not been murdered remained in the courthouse for four days without food, during which time some of their number were ordered to build a fence around certain run down buildings at the edge of town. Their quarters thus encircled, the Jews were forced to move into Novogrudok’s first ghetto. There were up to fifty people sleeping in a single building, with only the clothes they’d worn from their homes the morning before the massacre. The ghetto inhabitants received a ration of two hundred and fifty grams of bread a day and the occasional potato.
Weeks after the massacre, on New Year’s Eve, the Germans came to the ghetto and demanded a small force of boys to keep a fire going in the governor’s mansion, where German officers were celebrating the holiday. They needed the youths to keep the pipes from freezing. Lisa said there were three boys, Rae recalled there were twenty. But they both agree on the outlines of the story: That the boys, their sixteen-year-old brother Chanon among them, were tending the fire when a drunken German decided to entertain the party by demanding the boys raise their arms and say “Heil Hitler.” Then he shot them. Chanon took a bullet in the leg and fell back on the fire, where he remained while the Germans checked the boys for signs of life. Burnt and shot, he was able to crawl out of the Nazi mansion, where he was found (Lisa said by some boys on a work assignment, Rae said by their mother) and smuggled back into the ghetto in a wheelbarrow full of straw. Hidden for months, he was able to recover.
In the ghetto, there was an active debate about how to respond. Some Jews began to escape into the forest. But others were convinced it was folly to brave the Polish winter. The Nazis needed them to support their army. They must be the elect, they reasoned, surely the Nazis couldn’t kill them all. They would survive the war, they thought. The vast and frozen Russian territory had defeated Napoleon. Surely it would defeat Hitler.
They were also too terrified to leave. A friend of Rae’s, who later moved to Saddle River, New Jersey, had a sister “so beautiful, that Miss America, you cannot find such a beautiful girl, intelligent,” Rae said. She tried to run out of the ghetto with a non-Jew. But the Germans caught her, brought her back, and hung her from a tree. They cut off her breasts. Rae said, “They pushed in a stick, I can’t tell you where, but you know where. And they made scared all the people, not to move.”
The German army’s demands were relentless. The ghetto residents were ordered to work on rebuilding the structures the Nazi bombs had destroyed, make clothing and saddles for Nazi soldiers and their horses, cook for the German army, and otherwise stoke the fires of the Nazi war effort. In May of 1942, Jews were brought in from the surrounding villages, temporarily swelling the population of the ghetto. Soon, they were killed, too.
At four o’clock one morning, rousting the ghetto residents from their cramped sleep, the Nazis announced that they were taking the children to “kindergarten, they have a school, special for them.” But the families didn’t believe it. Mothers and fathers were kneeling on the floor, begging the Germans to leave the children alone. As Rae described it, one German stood with his white gloves on and pulled a child away from their mother, who was kneeling and begging. He told her she had to let her child go, or she was going with them. The Jews tried to hide some children behind stacks of newspapers, but the Nazis came back, with German shepherds, and poisoned them. Now, no Jewish children remained in Novogrudok.
In February 1943, the Germans came again, this time for older people they thought were too weak to work, Rae’s mother, aged forty-two, among them. Rae and her family had tried to dig a hiding place for Hinda, but the Germans surprised them early in the morning. Through a window, Rae said, she, Lisa, Chanon, and their father watched their mother shot to death. At the end of this liquidation, there were only a few hundred Jews left alive.
By midsummer 1943, the Jews, the four grieving Kushners among them, had been relocated to some rough structures near the courthouse. There was a large fence, two rings of barbed wire, searchlights. All the residents had a number, and were counted every day. Oshman called it “a real concentration camp.”
There were those who imagined that God had selected them to survive, but most of those who remained understood they faced certain death. By this time, word had reached the Jews of a partisan camp run by Tuvia Bielski some twenty-five miles away, in the Naliboki forest. Bielski, who was memorialized in the book and movie Defiance, offered haven to any Jew who could reach his camp. It was the largest organized Jewish armed resistance against the Nazis.
The Jews in the Novogrudok ghetto sent word to Bielski: they wanted him to mount an attack to release them from the ghetto. Bielski smuggled a message back: he reiterated his offer of shelter, but he didn’t have the resources to help them escape. With no other option, the last survivors of the Novogrudok ghetto, including Rae, Lisa, Chanon and Naum Kushner, Sonya Oshman, and Jack Kagan, began to dig day and night. They smuggled implements from their work sites: pieces of wood, spoons. After long hours of labor under Nazi overseers, they stayed up all night, removing bags of dirt from the tunnel and passing them along a human chain to be stacked behind the walls to hide their activity. They worked like this for three months, at one point assigning the Jewish electrician to wire the tunnel with lights. The initial plan was to build a 150-meter tunnel to terminate in a cornfield, but the harvest came, and they had to more than double the length. Chanon Kushner, by now eighteen, was among the dozens of Jews who dug out the earth. As the tunnel neared completion, one of their number became frightened, saying the Nazis would surely catch and kill them all. The others worried he was going to inform on them to the Nazis, so they took him into the tunnel and choked him to death.
On a rainy night at the end of September 1943, as the Rosh Hashanah holiday was beginning, the residents of the ghetto decided conditions were right. With rain pounding down, they loosened a sheet of tin on the roof to add to the din. The electrician shorted the electric wires to dim the searchlights. The two hundred and fifty or so remaining residents lined up, the youngest and strongest in the front. The tunnel was claustrophobic, only large enough for one person to crawl through at a time. The lineup ensured that if anyone elderly fainted and blocked the tiny tunnel, there’d be fewer stuck behind. Rae and Lisa, though they were young, decided to stay back with their father. Lashed together with ropes and belts so they wouldn’t lose their way, wriggling through a sixty-centimeter-wide dirt tunnel with another human’s feet in their faces, all two hundred fifty Jews escaped Novogrudok.
At the end of the tunnel, connected by a belt to Lisa and Rae, Naum Kushner faltered. “I told my children: ‘You are young, go save yourself, leave me here,’ ” he was quoted in Nechama Tec’s Defiance as saying. “One of my daughters had an onion and an apple. She smeared the onion over my face and I felt better.”8 The sting woke him up. He kept moving. Chanon Kushner was not so lucky. He and the other leaders of the escape became disoriented when they exited the tunnel in the driving rain. There was delirium in being free, out beyond the ghetto walls. The boys became confused and started to run in different directions. The next day, the enraged Nazis found Chanon and the others, and shot them. This was the second time the Nazis had shot Chanon and left him for dead. This time, he did not survive.
But Rae made it. As she, Lisa, and Naum were leaving the tunnel, Rae latched on to a Jewish youth who was from that area, who knew the countryside. She grabbed his pants and told him he was not going without her family. “We’re gonna die all together or we’re gonna live all together,” Rae said. The boy started to cry. He had someone, a gentile woman, who would take him in. But if he brought Rae, and Naum, and Lisa, he feared, she would call the Germans and they would all die. Rae told him that if she called the Germans they would all die together.
The country boy led the Kushners to the farmhouse, where the owner recognized them from the fur store. She gave them bread, water, and onions, but ushered them on their way, afraid the Germans would kill her if she was discovered hiding Jews. Another group, coming after Rae and Lisa and Naum and the farmer boy, prevailed on the woman to let them stay. All eight of them, including the Polish woman and her husband, were killed when the Nazis discovered them.
For the next ten days, from Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur, the Kushners and the country boy hid in the bushes in the pouring rain. Lisa almost gave up, “What kind of life is this?” she asked. “Let them kill us already.” Eventually, they found a farmer to take them in. After two days, wagons pulled up. At first, Rae thought it was the Nazis. The men had machine guns. But soon they recognized the Jewish partisans. Tuvia Bielski had heard of their escape and dispatched a group to look for survivors.
For nine months, from the fall of 1943 until the summer of 1944, Rae lived in the woods with the Bielski partisans, in a highly organized camp of over a thousand Jews. At night, small armed groups would make their way silently to farms owned by gentiles for potatoes, onions, bread—and if they were lucky, an egg or a piece of meat. The partisans’ tactics could be brutal: when they believed Belarusian farmers were turning Jews over to the Nazis, the partisans would kill them, sometimes slaying whole families. Then the food was collected, and the ammunition, and brought back to the camp for defense and more raids.
Inside the camp there were artisan shops, a central kitchen, even a theater. Amid the death and destruction, men and women took “forest wives” and “forest husbands.” There were even a few children, doted on by the whole group, especially loved, because so many children had been murdered by the Nazis.
Sometime during this period, Rae Kushner met Yossel Berkowitz— Joseph. The accounts vary slightly in their facts but not in their import. In her testimony to Kean University, Rae told her interlocutor that she knew her husband before the war, that he had lived in a small town near hers. The version told in The Miracle of Life, a history written by her four children, goes like this: Yossel had escaped from a Nazi work camp, and lived in a hole in the forest before joining the partisans, where he met Rae. Joseph’s brother Chaim had wanted to marry Rae before the war, but wasn’t permitted to because of class differences. But the Holocaust erased those differences. “In the woods, escaping from the Nazis, there were no social class distinctions. All were simply Jews.”
By the spring of 1944, the Soviets had repulsed the Nazis from Leningrad and started to march west. Germans began to escape to the forest, shooting Jews as they retreated. The Jews struck back, beating Nazis to death. The forest, which had been a place of refuge, was becoming a battleground. In July 1944, the Soviets ordered Tuvia Bielski to lead the group back to Novogrudok. As Nechama Tec told it in her book Defiance, the Russians feared the forest would become the base for anti-Communist sabotage, and ordered the Jews to destroy the camp. Early on the last morning they wrecked bunks, filled wells with soil, and buried utensils. The next day, Bielski assembled the twelve hundred camp resi- dents in a line extending a full mile. “First came the scouts on horseback, followed by marching fighters, then came the carts pulled by horses, followed by all the walking survivors. Only the sick and very weak were allowed to ride in the carts.” Their march back to Novogrudok took two days. “There was no joy in our hearts,” one partisan told Tec. “As we neared the areas of Jewish settlements, we realized the extent of the disaster that had befallen us. It looked as if our very lives had been consumed by flames, we were walking into a wasteland.”
Novogrudok was an inhospitable place. The Soviets pressed the Jews to join their army. The Jews had lost their homes and their businesses, all their capital, all their documents. All that was left was destruction and mass graves.
“You cannot imagine, I fainted twice,” Rae said. “We all wanted to run away from our town. We wanted to run any place—but like, Russia took us in. We were afraid to move. We couldn’t move. You needed a passport. You needed papers. It’s not so easy.” They organized and they made passports. They asked themselves, “Where should we run? Nobody wants to take us in.”
Still, there was a Jewish underground, helping to plot their escape. Nine months after their return to Novogrudok, telling Russian soldiers they were Greeks, Rae, her sister and father boarded a train to Czechoslovakia, and then made their way to Hungary, where she met up with Joseph. After so much destruction and loss, the desire to couple was irresistible. Single boys and single girls wanted to get married. They all felt lost, alone. No families from Novogrudok were left intact. Every one had lost someone. In a synagogue in Budapest, alongside some twenty other couples, Rae and Joe were married by a rabbi.
There is a record of this moment, a ketubah, or Jewish wedding contract, normally a carefully prepared document, but in this case hastily scrawled on yellow paper with different pens, written before they fled again. According to The Miracle of Life, the couple then “illegally crossed the Alps and several borders by foot, train and any other available mode of transportation,” ending up in a displaced persons camp near Rome. There, they were stuck for four years.
Their daughter, Linda, was born in the refugee camp, as the Kushners frantically pleaded for papers from South Africa, Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States. “We would go anywhere where we could live in freedom but nobody wanted us.” Rae said. “Nobody opened their doors to us. Nobody wanted to take us in.”13 A picture from those years shows Rae, her lipsticked mouth a perfect bow, her shoulder-length hair still lush and brown, brushed up and back, her once forthright gaze now indelibly marred with worry and pain.
Finally, with the help of the US refugee aid group HIAS (the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society), Rae, Joseph, and baby Linda, along with Rae’s sister Lisa and their father Naum, received visas to travel by ship to the United States. Their passage on the SS Sobieski, from Genoa to New York, took two weeks. Joe was seasick the whole time. The Kushners were anxious, unsure of what was ahead. But they had faith it would be better than where they came from.
Gaunt, bedraggled, speaking very little English, Rae and Joe, Naum, Lisa, and baby Linda were greeted on the docks on March 29, 1949, by the refugee workers. The organization sheltered them and helped Joe find work. Rae took English classes and managed the family’s money.
After Linda, Joe and Rae had three more children. First Murray, then Charles, then Esther. Linda was named for Rae’s mother, shot by the Nazis as Rae watched from the window. Charles was named for Rae’s brother Chanon, who had survived fire and bullets to help build a tunnel that saved hundreds of lives, only to die when he reached the open air outside the ghetto. Esther was named for Rae’s older sister, who made a futile run for her life at the Novogrudok courthouse in December 1941, before perishing in a mass grave on the edge of town. Over fifty years later, on the occasion of their mother’s seventy-fifth birthday, Chanon and Esther’s namesakes, Charles Kushner and Esther Schulder, along with their siblings Murray and Linda, pulled together their parents’ stories in the book The Miracle of Life. It began by quoting Proverbs, Chapter 1, Verse 8: “Hear, my child, the instruction of your father, and do not forsake the teaching of your mother.” Five years after that, their families stopped speaking, for good.
[ Return to the review of “American Oligarchs.” ]