My Grandmother Kept Telling Us About the Nazis. Now I Know Why.
My grandmother Marianne spent her entire life telling the story of how she, her parents and her three brothers escaped Nazi Germany. At Thanksgiving or during Jewish holidays she would recount the same memories over and over, seemingly still traumatized by the violence she had witnessed and the hatred she saw from her German friends and neighbors.
The story she told, preserved in her unpublished memoirs — a combination of her own reflections and meticulously compiled correspondence and records related to her family’s escape — detailed the changes that came as authoritarianism slowly gained power, incrementally at first, so that people became accustomed to them. Writing about her childhood in Pirmasens, Germany, in the years following Hitler’s rise to power, Marianne recalled her non-Jewish friends turning their backs on her, her brothers being beaten up at school by classmates in the Hitler Youth and watching as other Jewish classmates in her public school disappeared, until she herself was no longer permitted to attend. She recalled lighting Sabbath candles on Friday nights in her family’s apartment, with the sound of the Nazi storm troopers’ boots marching past on the pavement, as they sang songs about violently murdering Jews. Six million Jewish people and millions of others were ultimately murdered by the Nazi regime.
[Sign up for the At War newsletter for more stories about World War II.]
Marianne’s immediate family had no illusions about the threat that Nazism posed, though many other relatives thought that it was a phase that would pass, like other waves of anti-Semitism that had preceded it. While my great-grandfather, Dagobert Nellhaus, a rabbi, was not prepared to abandon his congregation, he had already taken some measures for the rest of his family to leave Germany, if necessary. In 1936, after the Nuremberg laws went into force and effectively stripped German Jews of citizenship, one of Marianne’s older brothers, Gerhard, was sent to live in the United States. He became the foster son of a Jewish family, the Blumbergs, in Terre Haute, Ind.
The rest of the family was still in Germany on Nov. 9, 1938, when Nazis destroyed Jewish businesses and synagogues during what became known as Kristallnacht, the “night of broken glass.” Some 30,000 Jewish men were arrested and sent to Dachau, Buchenwald and other concentration camps. The morning after, as my grandmother recalled, Dagobert took her and her brother Martin to the collapsed ruins of the synagogue. They must have watched in shock as their father trod through the charred remains where the pews had stood, where congregants had faced toward Jerusalem and watched him lead prayers from the bimah, the elevated platform from which the Torah is read. Marianne was just 11 years old. In her memoir, she recalls that he searched the ruins and found a Torah, which Jews traditionally treat with the dignity and reverence that would be accorded to an important person. The three of them walked the short way home to find the S.S. waiting to arrest Dagobert. They confiscated his library, including a sizable collection of Jewish books and artifacts and, Martin still remembers, a Torah. My great-grandfather and around 150 other Jewish men from Pirmasens were taken to Dachau concentration camp, where he was held for a little over a month. While he was in Dachau, my great-grandmother, Minna — who spoke little or no English and must have needed to find translators to help her — desperately contacted the Blumbergs in Indiana to try to get American visas for the entire family.
Dagobert was released from Dachau and returned to the family in mid-December 1938. At that point, the imprisonment of Jewish men was often meant to frighten them into leaving Germany, so incarceration was temporary. My grandmother recalled that the five weeks her father was gone had aged him. His hair was shorn, and he was emaciated. While he and Minna never talked about his experience in Dachau in front of the children, my grandmother picked up fragments about the mistreatment there: the diet of watery soup that left everyone undernourished and the men who returned home with missing toes from frostbite after standing for hours in the freezing morning roll call.
American laws at the time posed a tremendous obstacle to the Nellhaus family’s attempts to resettle in the United States. The Johnson-Reed Immigration Act of 1924 imposed a strict quota for each country, greatly reducing the number of people that could enter the United States from Germany, Poland and other countries that were home to large Jewish populations. There were exceptions, including those for clergy members, as long as they could prove that they would be gainfully employed upon arrival. An affidavit from the board of the synagogue in Terre Haute stating that my great-grandfather would be its assistant rabbi proved the family’s means of escape. The family arrived in New York on the S.S. Europa on Aug. 16, 1939. Two weeks later, Adolf Hitler invaded Poland, and the narrow door to escape began to shut.
It’s unclear if the assistant rabbi position in Indiana ever actually existed. The family settled in the Boston area, where friends of the Blumbergs helped them find an apartment and employment, and they immediately went to work and school. By the end of World War II, all three of Marianne’s brothers were serving in the military. My grandmother went to Boston University and then had a long career at the State University of New York at Buffalo, where her fluency in four languages made her well-suited to work as a reference librarian in modern languages. I imagine Marianne chose to become a keeper of books because the field allowed her to be a protector of cultural property, which she had seen desecrated and destroyed on Kristallnacht. Later, after a trip to Russia in the early 1980s, she became deeply involved in supporting the resettlement of Soviet Jews, including successfully sponsoring the settlement in Buffalo of families who had been separated by the Iron Curtain.
My family’s commitment to immediately contribute to the nation that welcomed them influenced my decision to serve. I joined the Navy when I was 22. Before that, I rarely thought about my Jewish identity. In the military, I was around fewer Jewish people than ever before, and my heritage was on display, stitched on my uniform in the form of a recognizably Jewish surname. Fellow service members often asked thoughtful questions about Judaism. Non-Jewish chaplains went to great lengths to support me when I served as a Jewish lay leader. Commanding officers allowed me days off for major holidays without charging leave. The culinary specialists on the U.S.S. Peleliu learned how to make traditional Jewish meals, for those of us who wanted the right foods every Shabbat and on major holidays. My foreign military counterparts showed me the same respect. German military officers I worked with while assigned to NATO treated me as one of their own. Muslim officers from some of the Gulf States invited me into their homes, and we compared notes on our traditions. My religion made me stand apart from most of my peers, but I was always welcomed.
Recently I have had to face a very different attitude toward my religion, right here in the United States. The synagogue I attend in Washington, Sixth & I Historic Synagogue, was desecrated in late November with anti-Semitic graffiti. I had found security and acceptance in the places where I had initially been self-conscious about my Jewishness, but my spiritual home in the nation’s capital was not safe from a bigot inscribing his hatred on the very doors that welcome strangers to prayer and cultural events.
I recently found a copy of the speech that my grandmother and grandfather gave on the day of my bat mitzvah, when in my 13-year-old awkwardness I publicly read from the Torah for the first time. I realized how lucky I was to grow up never having to live in fear because I am Jewish — and how lucky I am even to be alive because the United States had welcomed my family here. Reading my grandparents’ speech 20 years later, I wept at this passage: “We are connected in many ways to the generations who precede us. … Nevertheless, we all share the pride of being part of a people who, despite pogroms, prejudice and persecution, have stubbornly kept their identity. … You have made a commitment to the future, and you will find how best you can fulfill that commitment.”
My grandmother, Marianne Goldstein, died last month on Dec. 21, in Buffalo. I’ve thought about all of the stories she told through the years about our family and the Holocaust and the millions of other families around the world who were uprooted, ripped apart, forced to flee, detained and killed. I considered why she repeated these stories over and over. It wasn’t just about remembering; she wanted everyone to know that no society is immune from once again committing or becoming complicit in such violence, whether it’s directed against Jews or another group.
Andrea N. Goldstein is a United States Navy veteran. She was a Pat Tillman Scholar at the Fletcher School at Tufts University and is a member of the Truman National Security Project’s Defense Council. Follow her on Twitter: @AN_Goldstein
Sign up for the weekly At War newsletter to follow The Times’s “Beyond the World War II We Know” series. For more coverage of conflict, visit nytimes.com/atwar.