The Supreme Court’s Collapsing Center on Religion
Every Supreme Court case tells a story. Both sides vie to persuade the justices — and, in big cases, the public as well — to see the issues through one particular narrative lens. Heading into last week’s argument on whether Montana was obliged by the federal Constitution to keep subsidizing religious-school tuition under a scholarship program that violated the state Constitution, it was easy to see which story line was winning. “School Choice Battle May Boost Religious Freedom” was the headline on USA Today’s preview of the argument.
That is indeed the narrative put forward by lawyers for the school-choice movement, which seeks to use this case to break through the barriers that in many states have prevented parents from using school tuition vouchers for parochial school tuition. The libertarian Institute for Justice, long a leading proponent of vouchers, is framing its appeal, Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue, as a case about religious freedom. (It’s worth noting that this is not a religion case brought by the religious right; conservative religious groups, along with the Trump administration, are riding the Institute for Justice’s libertarian coattails in a symbiosis of convenience.)
The state, defending its high court’s decision to shut down the scholarship program for all private schools, secular and religious, has no correspondingly snappy one-liner to offer. It argues that religious freedom is enhanced rather than threatened by preventing the flow of public money to religious institutions. That argument gained no traction last week with a Supreme Court majority determined to lower the constitutional barrier between church and state. That this odd case is a glaringly defective vehicle for reaching that goal only shows the depth of the majority’s determination.
The case is also a perfect vehicle for showing something else: the contradiction at the heart of the religious claims being pressed on increasingly receptive federal courts. Those making these claims say that religion and nonreligion must be treated equally. “The rule is religious neutrality,” Richard D. Komer, a senior attorney with the Institute for Justice, told the justices. So if parents are able use publicly financed scholarships for secular private school tuition, this argument goes, there should be no difference when it comes to religious school tuition.
When pressed, however, as they are in this case, religion advocates seek something more than equal treatment. It turns out that what they want is special treatment. That’s this case. The plaintiffs are claiming a continued entitlement to scholarships for their parochial school tuition despite the fact that the state court ended the scholarship program for religious and secular schools alike. No one gets the money.
It’s not enough that all parents are being treated the same, no matter where they choose to enroll their children. It’s different from the invitingly simple “religious freedom” story line, more complex, with deep implications for how Americans will live in an increasingly diverse society.
Montana’s Constitution, which the voters ratified in 1972, carried forward the principle of no aid to religious schools that was part of the state’s original 1889 Constitution. The current Article X prohibits using state money “for any sectarian purpose or to aid any church, school, academy, seminary, college, university, or other literary or scientific institution, controlled in whole or in part by any church, sect, or denomination.”
The one exception was something new in the state’s Constitution: an exception for money from federal grants “provided to the state for the express purpose of distribution to nonpublic education,” which may pass through the state’s hands and into the coffers of religious schools. This exception won the Montana Catholic Conference’s support for the new Constitution. A brief filed by a majority of the surviving constitutional convention delegates cites the Catholic support to refute the allegation — offered forcefully in the briefs and during the argument — that the no-aid clause reflects anti-Catholic bigotry.
In 2015, following a model used in other states, the Montana Legislature established a tax credit of up to $150 for taxpayers who donated to a “student scholarship organization.” That organization in turn would use the pooled money to offer need-based scholarships to parents for use at any private school. As in most states, the majority of Montana’s private schools are religious; in Montana, all the religious schools are Christian. (No non-Christian religion claims more than 1 percent of Montana’s population.) Thirteen schools participated in the program, of which 12 were religious; the single secular school serves children with disabilities.
Parents who were using the scholarships at religious schools sued in state court after the state’s Department of Revenue issued a rule requiring the program to conform to the Constitution’s no-aid clause. The Montana Supreme Court, declaring itself bound by the clause, invalidated the entire tax-credit program; there are no more scholarships for use at any private school, religious or secular.
“And the consequence of this decision is that there is no discrimination,” Justice Elena Kagan told Mr. Komer. “Neither set of parents is getting what they want,” she went on. “Now, you might say, well, both should get what they want, and maybe that would be a better world. Maybe. But the constitutional harm that it seems that you have to allege here is the discrimination. And there is no discrimination.”
Exactly.
When the clock ran out on Mr. Komer, the administration’s principal deputy solicitor general, Jeffrey Wall, picked up the plaintiffs’ argument. It was a question, Mr. Wall said, of the religious school parents’ constitutional right to free exercise of religion. “Their free exercise is being penalized,” he said.
There is so much about this case that is simply backward. The administration argues in its brief that “the constitutional violation in this case is especially egregious because it involves the education of children.” But to the contrary, that’s exactly where the wall of separation has to be maintained with the greatest care. Religious education serves a purpose, inculcating religious values and preserving religious traditions. A parochial school is not just another neighborhood school down the block.
Certainly, parents are constitutionally entitled to choose a religious education for their children. And under a 2002 Supreme Court decision, Zelman v. Simmons-Harris, states are free to offer parents the choice of using vouchers to help pay for religious education. That was a bitterly fought 5-to-4 decision. The administration now would go further: not only that a state may include religious schools in a voucher program, but that it must include them, if it wants to have a voucher program at all.
And where is the stopping point of that argument? Justice Stephen Breyer pressed that question on Deputy Solicitor General Wall. Cities and states support public schools, Justice Breyer observed, asking: “If I decide for you, am I saying that they have to give money — same amounts, proportionate — to the parochial school?”
Mr. Wall deflected the question, instead pointing to the court’s decision three years ago that a state program in Missouri to enhance playground safety couldn’t exclude the playgrounds of church-run schools.
“The court said you can’t deny a generally available public benefit to an entity that’s otherwise qualified based solely on its religious character or nature,” Mr. Wall said of that 2017 ruling.
In fact, the court both did and didn’t say that in the decision. Chief Justice John Roberts’s opinion in Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia v. Comer contained a footnote: “This case involves express discrimination based on religious identity with respect to playground resurfacing. We do not address religious uses of funding or other forms of discrimination.”
“That rule applies equally to schools as to playgrounds,” Mr. Wall nonetheless asserted.
Does it? Will it? How can it not, now?
The footnote in the Trinity Lutheran case was extremely odd. It provoked an objection from Justice Neil Gorsuch that the Supreme Court rules on general principles rather than specific facts, and that “general principles here do not permit discrimination against religious exercise — whether on the playground or not.”
Chief Justice Roberts no doubt included the footnote as a necessary play to the center to satisfy some member or members of a majority more fragile than the eventual 7-to-2 vote made it appear. Justice Kagan? Justice Anthony Kennedy, whose seat is now filled by Justice Brett Kavanaugh? The chief justice himself?
“The center cannot hold,” Yeats wrote in “The Second Coming.” He didn’t have the United States Supreme Court in mind when he wrote that line. That doesn’t mean it doesn’t fit.