Rhona Wurtele, One of Canada’s ‘Flying Twins’ Ski Champions, Dies at 97
Rhona Wurtele and her identical twin, Rhoda, began skiing at age 5 in the hilly Westmount neighborhood of Montreal. A few years later, they were ski-jumping, and in 1948 they were the only women named to Canada’s Alpine skiing team at the Winter Olympics in St. Moritz, Switzerland.
The sisters, who called themselves the “Flying Twins,” did not win an Olympic medal, but they often finished first or second in Canadian and American ski championship events in the 1940s and early ’50s. They also taught thousands of Canadians to ski in a half-century as instructors.
When Grace Rhona Wurtele Gillis died on Jan. 17 in suburban Montreal at 97, she and her sister, Isabella Rhoda Wurtele Eaves, who survives her, were remembered as pioneers of women’s skiing in Canada.
As youngsters, the Wurtele twins took up many sports, including swimming and tennis, before concentrating on skiing. In 2015, they were jointly inducted into Canada’s Sports Hall of Fame in Calgary, Alberta.
“They were my first heroines,” Anne Heggtveit of Canada, who won a gold medal in slalom at the 1960 Squaw Valley Games, told The Montreal Gazette in 2002. “If you asked who was the greatest all-time athlete in Canada, it would have to be them. They took part in so many sports.”
The Wurtele twins were born on Jan. 21, 1922, in Saint-Lambert, Quebec, a suburb of Montreal, the youngest of five children of John Stone Hunter Wurtele and Edith Douglas (Fairweather) Wurtele. Their father was a hydroelectric engineer and a senior executive of the Southern Canada Power Company. Their mother was a homemaker.
The family soon moved to Westmount, and the twins set out on an adventurous path. “At 5, their father strapped a pair of skis on each and pushed them out the front door,” Byron Rempel wrote in “No Limits” (2007), a biography of the twins. By the time they were in their 20s, they were elite skiers.
Rhona and Rhoda reached the pinnacle of winter sports at the St. Moritz Olympics, but it became the scene of misadventures for both.
Some two weeks before the Games, a male teammate took a sudden turn in front of Rhoda during a practice run and hit her skis. She fell and broke an ankle, ending her chance of competing.
A couple of days later, Rhona hit a rock during practice, causing a ski to fly up and tear a gash in the back of her head. She came down with a fever, spent about a week in the hospital, then set out to compete in the downhill.
She was waiting to begin her run when a man carrying skis on his shoulder accidentally clobbered her on the already injured back of the head.
Despite her multiple head injuries, Rhona raced. But in making a sharp turn, as she once told CTV Montreal, “I flew up in the air, and my right ski hit the left ankle. I heard this loud crack — and it broke.”
She got up and finished the race, albeit in last place.
Rhoda competed in three events at the 1952 Oslo Olympics; her best finish was ninth place in the giant slalom.
The twins received a trophy collectively naming them Canada’s Most Outstanding Woman Athlete in 1945. They were inducted into the U.S. Ski and Snowboard Hall of Fame in 1969 and the Canadian Ski Hall of Fame in 1982.
They were given the Canadian Ski Instructors Alliance award in 1998 for their 50 years teaching their sport.
In 2019, the sisters were invested as members of the Order of Canada, which is bestowed for service to the nation. The citation cited their “role as trailblazers in winter sports.”
Ms. Gillis’s death was confirmed by her daughter Margie Gillis, a prominent modern-dance performer and choreographer and an officer of the Order of Canada.
In addition to her sister and Ms. Gillis, Rhona is survived by her son Jere Gillis, who was a forward in the National Hockey League in the 1970s and ’80s, including stints with the Vancouver Canucks and the New York Rangers; her daughter Nancy Gillis, an acrobatic skier; four grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. Her son Christopher Gillis, who was also a well-known dancer and choreographer and at times performed with his sister Margie, died in 1993.
Ms. Gillis’s marriage to Gene Gillis, whom she met when he was a member of the United States men’s Alpine skiing team at St. Moritz, ended in divorce. He died in 2005.
Rhona and Rhoda continued to ski on occasion into their 90s. Rhoda took up skydiving in 2017 on a trip to Fiji with her son John Eaves, a world freestyle skiing champion and a stunt double and actor in films.
“We just laughed our way through life, and were really evenly matched at everything we did,” Rhona said of her sister in an interview in 2017 with the British newspaper The Telegraph. “I hope we led the way for others to follow.”
The twins “started everything,” Kerrin Lee-Gartner, a Canadian Olympic downhill champion, told the Canadian Press news agency in 2015, when Rhona and Rhoda were inducted into the sports hall at Calgary in the Legends category. “We started believing in our dreams because of those who did it before us.”