When Pete Buttigieg Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
Today on “The Choice,” the endorsement podcast from NYT Opinion, former South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg visits the Times boardroom for his interview. The editorial board challenged Buttigieg on his time at the consulting firm McKinsey, his campaign’s missteps in courting black voters, and the details of enacting his public health option. Plus: inscrutable gym PowerPoints, friending Mark Zuckerberg, and a bettered-flavored mayo.
Then, tune in to the bonus deliberation episode below to hear the board’s reactions and concerns after Buttigieg’s interview, and a deeper dive into the candidate’s plans to change the number of justices on the Supreme Court with board member Jesse Wegman.
To read the unabridged transcript from the interview with Buttigieg, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the primary election candidates' on-the-job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different Democratic candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Thursday, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to their decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the U.S.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and their endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | PocketCasts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey