Landlord in Deadly East Village Explosion Sentenced to at Least 4 Years
To keep tens of thousands of dollars in monthly rent money rolling in, Maria Hrynenko, a landlord in the East Village, rolled the dice and decided to cut corners at her tenants’ expense, installing a jury-rigged gas system. That gamble was illegal, perilous and, ultimately, deadly.
On Friday morning, Ms. Hrynenko learned that, as a result, she would spend between four and 12 years in prison.
Ms. Hrynenko was sentenced in State Supreme Court in Manhattan for allowing an illegal gas line on her property that caused a fatal 2015 explosion. The blast killed two men, obliterated two Manhattan buildings and injured more than a dozen people.
“The defendants did, in a matter of speaking, roll the dice on the lives of these people,” Justice Michael J. Obus said in handing down Ms. Hrynenko’s sentence.
A jury found Ms. Hrynenko and two other defendants — a general contractor and an unlicensed plumber — guilty of manslaughter and related offenses in November.
The contractor, Dilber Kukic, 44, and the plumber, Athanasios Ioannidis, 59, were also sentenced on Friday to between four and 12 years in prison. For all three defendants, the amount of time will be determined by their behavior in prison.
Ms. Hrynenko’s son, Michael, 31, was also charged for his role in the scheme, but died in 2017 while awaiting trial. A fifth person, Andrew Trombettas, a licensed plumber who sold the use of his credentials to Mr. Ioannidis, pleaded guilty to lesser charges in March and was placed on probation.
The sentencing is the culmination of a narrative that began nearly five years ago after the blast leveled half of an East Village block and left New Yorkers worried about vulnerabilities in the city’s infrastructure. The explosion happened just over a year after a 2014 gas blast leveled two buildings on Park Avenue in East Harlem, killing eight people.
The proceedings closed a painful chapter for the families of the two men killed in the blast: Nicholas Figueroa, 23, and Moises Ismael Locón Yac, 27, both immigrants in New York City.
“Part of the reason people come here is because of the system of justice that we have,” Justice Obus said.
In court statements, relatives of both victims had asked for the maximum sentence of five to 15 years for all three defendants.
“For me and my family, life will never be the same,” said Mr. Figueroa’s mother, Ana Lanza. “I did not just lose my son that day. I lost my voice, my will to continue on, my will to live.”
David Locón Yac, the brother of Moises Ismael Locón Yac, tearfully recalled the morning of the blast and the hug he gave his sibling just before he got on the subway, heading to work.
“The hardest part was telling my mother that my brother had died,” he said.
Throughout the sentencing, Ms. Hrynenko sat quietly, occasionally dropping her head to wipe her eyes.
During the trial last year, prosecutors painted Ms. Hrynenko as a money-hungry landlord, eager to capitalize on New York’s real estate boom, to catastrophic consequence.
“What was it that made these three defendants circumvent all the rules they were aware of?” the lead prosecutor, Rachana Pathak, said in her closing remarks in November. “Money, money, money.”
At Friday’s sentencing, Ms. Hrynenko’s lawyer countered that characterization. He described his client as a survivor of domestic abuse who was a loving woman.
“She cares about others,” the lawyer, Michael K. Burke, said. “She cares about people.”
Mr. Kukic’s lawyer, Marc Agnifilo, said his client, a refugee who had fled war-torn Montenegro decades ago, was a dedicated worker striving to help bring his family members to the United States.
Mr. Kukic told the court that he would trade his life for those of the victims “in a second.”
From the start, the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., described the case as a death-dealing plot of deceit, chicanery and subterfuge.
After the death of her husband in 2004, Ms. Hrynenko assumed control of his housing stock. She hired Mr. Kukic to renovate apartments at 121 Second Avenue in 2013.
The work was completed the next year, but the utility company Consolidated Edison did not approve gas lines for the apartments. Still, Ms. Hrynenko immediately began shuffling tenants into the building, subletting apartments at an average price of $6,000 each per month.
Hyeonil Kim, the owner of Sushi Park, a popular Japanese restaurant on the building’s ground level, said he had wondered how the apartments got hot water and cooking gas since the only gas line into the building was dedicated to his restaurant.
In August 2014, Con Edison, responding to calls from people smelling gas, discovered that the utility line intended only for Sushi Park had been tapped with flexible plastic pipes to provide gas to the apartments. The company turned off gas at the building for nine days, until the plastic pipes were removed.
But Ms. Hrynenko, facing mounting complaints from tenants, devised a new plan. She would tap gas from a meter at her neighboring building at 119 Second Avenue and siphon it to her needy tenants, evidence at the trial showed.
The illegal system of pipes was constructed by Mr. Ioannidis and set up in a locked room in the basement at 121 Second Avenue, hidden from Con Ed inspectors, tenants and other workers, prosecutors said.
In 2015, on the day of the explosion, workers for the utility had returned to the building for a final inspection.
They found a faulty meter but no signs of leaking gas. Unknown to them, Mr. Kukic and Mr. Ioannidis had shut off the illegal gas line before the inspection, according to testimony at trial. Mr. Kukic even warned a tenant to say, if asked, “you don’t have gas.”
The explosion erupted when the two men turned the gas back on just minutes after Con Edison inspectors left the building.
As gas filled the basement, surveillance footage showed Mr. Kukic and Mr. Ioannidis running out of the building without warning any of the residents, Sushi Park patrons or calling 911, Mr. Vance said.
About one minute later, the gas-filled building exploded, sending flames as high as 40 feet into the air, a mushroom of billowing smoke over Lower Manhattan and the neighborhood into chaos.
Shards of shattered glass speckled the streets in front of the building, and onlookers described streets stained with blood as residents, patrons and workers, shellshocked by the explosion, bleeding and covered in dust and ash stumbled away from the fire.
The seven-alarm fire was so intense, the 250 firefighters called to the scene were forced at one point to withdraw from the building and attempt to quell the flames from a defensive position outside the building. “It was pretty crazy, pretty fast,” one onlooker said in an interview.
“You rarely see a scene of such devastation in the middle of a city like this,” Mayor Bill de Blasio told The New York Times as he surveyed the wreckage.
The bodies of Mr. Figueroa, who had been on a date at the sushi restaurant, and Mr. Yac, a busboy, were not recovered until three days after the blast.