Freeze on Global Entry Enrollment for New Yorkers: What We Know
The Department of Homeland Security said Wednesday that it would temporarily block New Yorkers from enrolling in the Trusted Traveler Programs, including Global Entry, which allow prescreened travelers to bypass lengthy lines at airports and border crossings.
The change, which takes immediate effect, was made in response to New York’s so-called Green Light Law, federal officials said. As part of that measure, which allows undocumented residents to obtain driver’s licenses, immigration officials were barred from gaining access to the state’s Department of Motor Vehicles databases without a court order.

If New York amends the law to grant federal officials access to those records, enrollment would be restored, a Homeland Security official said.
That seems unlikely. The law’s State Senate sponsor, Luis Sepúlveda, said he and his Democratic colleagues had no intention of revisiting the law. “We can’t allow the president to come in and try to bully us,” he said.
The decision to suspend enrollment escalates tensions between the Trump administration and the state, and the Green Light Law’s passage last year prompted backlash in more conservative areas of the state.
On Thursday morning, the department held a news conference on the status of Trusted Traveler programs, which includes TSA PreCheck, but several aspects were still unclear.
Here is what we know so far:
Yes.
There are a number of Trusted Traveler programs affected by the suspension, including Global Entry (for entry into the United States from abroad); Nexus (for entry from Canada); Sentri (for entry from Canada and Mexico); and Fast (for truck drivers entering from Canada and Mexico).
In a three-page letter announcing the suspension, Homeland Security’s acting secretary, Chad F. Wolf, wrote that New Yorkers would “no longer be able to enroll or re-enroll” in those expedited traveler programs.
Mr. Wolf did not indicate that the agency was revoking current membership in those programs.
Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of Homeland Security, said on Thursday that the approximately 175,000 New Yorkers currently enrolled in the programs who need to renew this year would be cut off by the end of 2020.
He said the 50,000 New Yorkers who are in the middle of the application process but have not yet received final approval would also immediately lose the opportunity.
Yes.
Mr. Wolf’s letter specifically said New Yorkers would not be allowed to enroll or “re-enroll.”
Once accepted, membership in the program is good for five years.
It is not clear whether applications placed outside New York or using a different address could work.
Getting accepted into the program, according to the Customs and Border Protection website, requires applicants to “undergo a rigorous background check and in-person interview before enrollment.”
There are several documents that may be needed for an application, according to the Trusted Traveler Programs website, including proof of citizenship, a passport and a valid driver’s license.
New Yorkers “currently enrolled in D.H.S. trusted traveler programs will continue to receive TSA PreCheck status,” said Lisa Farbstein, a T.S.A. spokeswoman.
TSA PreCheck, a program that allows travelers departing from the United States to use a separate, often shorter, line through airport security, is not one of the programs that Mr. Wolf mentioned in his letter.
New Yorkers can still can apply to the TSA PreCheck program separately, according to Ms. Farbstein.
However, Mr. Cuccinelli, who confirmed that PreCheck was not affected, warned, “It doesn’t mean it can’t be in the future.”
For two decades, there has been a fight in New York over whether to allow undocumented residents the legal right to obtain a state driver’s license. Last year, New York became one of the more than a dozen states to allow it. (New Jersey followed a few months later.)
Supporters said obtaining a driver’s license made it easier for people to perform routine tasks like dropping off children at school, shopping for groceries and visiting doctors. Critics raised concerns about verifying applicants’ identities and said the new law undermined federal immigration laws.
The measure faced resistance from county clerks in more conservative areas upstate who oversee some local motor vehicle offices. A few of those clerks threatened to call federal immigration officials if an applicant did not have documentation.
Despite the backlash, when the law took effect in December, offices for the Department of Motor Vehicles were swamped as newly eligible people applied for the legal right to drive.
The surprise suspension is just the latest flare in tensions between the Trump administration and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat who has often criticized President Trump’s hard-line immigration policies.
On Thursday, New York Democrats vowed to fight the action in court, with Mr. Cuomo calling it a “form of extortion” and similar to “what Trump did with Ukraine,” referring to the president’s request for help with a political opponent before releasing foreign aide.