6 Comedy Shows to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘JENA FRIEDMAN: MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE’ at Union Hall (Feb. 9, 5 p.m.). A former producer for “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart,” this comedian stepped out in front of the camera for her own surreal docucomedy series for Adult Swim called “Soft Focus With Jena Friedman.” It featured focus groups in which Friedman challenged men on their attitudes about sex and interviews with the likes of John McAfee and the so-called Cannibal Cop. Her stand-up is similarly provocative and political. Find out if she still has any hope for herself or the rest of us.
718-638-4400, unionhallny.com
NEMR at Gramercy Theater (Feb. 8, 7:30 and 10:30 p.m.). This comedian, whose full name is Nemr Abou Nassar, grew up in San Diego, but then, at the age of 10, moved back with his family to Lebanon, where he went on to help introduce Americanized stand-up to the Middle East in the early 2000s. He eventually returned to the States with his brand of comedy and in 2017 scored a Showtime special, “No Bombing in Beirut.”
mercuryeastpresents.com/thegramercytheatre
MARK NORMAND at Gotham Comedy Club (Feb. 7-8, 8 and 10 p.m.). How many comedians can say they’ve received a shout-out from Jerry Seinfeld during the broadcast of a 2019 Mets game? Only Normand can. The comedian, originally from New Orleans and a resident of New York since 2007, had another A-lister, Amy Schumer, in his corner for his 2017 Comedy Central special, “Don’t Be Yourself.” This weekend, he headlines one of the city’s most venerable comedy clubs.
212-367-9000, gothamcomedyclub.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
‘NATE’ at Improv Asylum (Feb. 11-13, 7:30 p.m.; through Feb. 16). In case you missed it last year, Natalie Palamides’s gender-bending take on toxic masculinity returns for a six-night run at this club in Chelsea. Jason Zinoman wrote in The New York Times that “Nate” is “a startlingly unusual creation — a clown show about consent that managed to be funny and ferocious, broad and nuanced, a prank on the audience that felt like a tickle.” The character Palamides has created for this one-hander is a far cry from the family-friendly, demure one she portrays on Progressive commercials.
212-203-5435, improvasylum.com
WHITMER THOMAS at the Bell House (Feb. 10, 7:30 p.m.). As an actor, Thomas has appeared on two episodes of the Netflix series “Glow,” as well as in the 2019 movie “Sword of Trust.” As a comedian, he has opened for Bo Burnham, who is the executive producer for Thomas’s first HBO special, “Whitmer Thomas: The Golden One.” This concert film and documentary premieres on Feb. 22.
718-643-6510, thebellhouseny.com
‘TIM AND ERIC: 2020 MANDATORY ATTENDANCE WORLD TOUR’ at the Town Hall (Feb. 12, 8 p.m.). Tim Heidecker and Eric Wareheim have succeeded on their own in supporting roles — Heidecker in Jordan Peele’s “Us” and Wareheim on Netflix’s “Master of None” — but they’re best known for their subversive late-night exploits on Adult Swim. They’re returning to TV later this year for a multicamera-sitcom spoof called “Beef House,” and hitting the road beforehand with a live tour. Their performance at Kings Theater in Brooklyn on Tuesday has sold out, but luckily tickets to this Midtown stop are still available.
thetownhall.org