12 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
JA RULE AND ASHANTI at Prudential Hall in Newark, N.J. (Jan. 4, 8 p.m.). By now, these co-headlining ambassadors of early 2000s R&B are accustomed to sharing the spotlight. While each maintaining solo careers of their own, the pair worked together to create some of their best-known music, including “Always on Time,” a hot and heavy duet that hit No. 1 in 2002 and showcases Ja Rule’s gruff rapping and Ashanti’s melismatic croon. The two continue to float the idea of a collaborative full-length album. Though no details have been confirmed, the possibility of hearing new material should draw fans to this performance on Saturday night.
888-466-5722, njpac.org
THE SHIVERS at the Sultan Room (Jan. 9, 8 p.m.). An enigmatic but prolific presence on New York’s indie music scene since the early 2000s, Sonny Santos goes by a variety of names, including Keith Zarriello and Sad Eyes Zarriello, his rapper alter ego. But he is perhaps best known as the creative mastermind and only permanent member of the Shivers, whose fuzzy, folksy 2004 album “Charades” earned a small but zealous following. The latest LP from this recording project, “I’m on Your Side,” came out in the fall. Lonesome and languid, it will make for an understated performance at Thursday night’s record release celebration.
thesultanroom.com
SMIF-N-WESSUN at Gramercy Theater (Jan. 9, 8 p.m.). This rap duo’s name, which riffs on that of a firearm manufacturer, sets the tone for their music. When Tekomin Williams, a.k.a. Tek, and Darrell Yates, who goes by the name Steele, joined forces in the early 1990s, they used their experiences growing up in the Brooklyn neighborhoods of Bedford-Stuyvesant and Brownsville to paint vivid lyrical pictures of streets plagued by violence, as heard on “Bucktown” and “Stand Strong” (“Don’t sleep ’cause you only manage to gain/A mental block on your brain or a glock to your frame”). Both are cuts from “Dah Shinin’,” the duo’s breakout album from 1995. On Thursday, they will perform at this Manhattan concert hall in celebration of that record’s 25th anniversary.
212-614-6932, thegramercytheatre.com
STARCHILD & THE NEW ROMANTIC at Brooklyn Bowl (Jan. 5, 8 p.m.). When Bryndon Cook’s debut album came out just under two years ago, he already possessed impressive industry bona fides — namely, a six-year stint in Solange’s band, and credits on albums by the likes of Blood Orange and Porches. Cook’s stage name, cribbed from a George Clinton song, reveals his affinity for throwback funk, which flavors the aforementioned debut, titled “Language.” But Cook’s most conspicuous influence is Prince, whose “1999” album Cook credits as the impetus for his foray into music. Like his hero, Cook is an energetic performer, sure to captivate the crowd at this performance on Sunday night.
718-963-3369, brooklynbowl.com
TOTH at Rough Trade NYC (Jan. 9, 8 p.m.). Those who keep tabs on Brooklyn’s indie-rock scene are likely familiar with Alex Toth, though they may not recognize his voice. In Rubblebucket, the band he co-founded over a decade ago, he plays trumpet and flute, leaving most of the vocals to his bandmate Kalmia Traver. Through this solo project, he has found the wherewithal to try his hand as a frontman and to write candidly about personal struggles with heartbreak and addiction. Though thematically heavy, the songs on the album he released in May are plummy and pop-laden, full of orchestral flourishes and bebop trumpets.
roughtradenyc.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
YOLA at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Jan. 8, 8 p.m.). Though this singer-songwriter hails from Bristol, England, her recordings are steeped in American tradition. Co-written and produced by the Black Keys’ Dan Auerbach, her debut album, “Walk Through Fire,” takes cues from Southern soul and Appalachian folk, as well as baroque pop. Rich arrangements bolster lyrics that demonstrate emotional fortitude, particularly on the record’s title track, which considers the potential for rebirth in the aftermath of destruction — in this case, both a terminated relationship and a literal fire that ravaged Yola’s home. Ahead of this month’s Grammys, at which the singer is up for four awards including best new artist, she performs at this Brooklyn concert hall.
718-486-5400, musichallofwilliamsburg.com
OLIVIA HORN
MAURICE BROWN at the Blue Note (Jan. 6-8, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). Brown’s music is a cross-pollination between the slicked electric textures of 1980s R&B, the warm grooves of Golden Era hip-hop, the thrashing power of rock and the effortless virtuosity of jazz. A trumpeter who goes by the name Mobetta, Brown has performed and recorded with a laundry list of pop and jazz stars; during this Blue Note run he will convene some top-flight talents from both worlds. His core band will include Isaiah Sharkey on guitar, Ben Williams on bass, James Francies on keyboards and Mike Mitchell on drums. On Monday, the Grammy-winning crossover star Anderson .Paak will handle drums and contribute vocals (Mitchell has the night off); on Tuesday, the rapper Talib Kweli will sit in.
212-475-8592, bluenote.net
MARÍA GRAND at the Stone (Jan. 7-11, 8:30 p.m.). Grand plays the tenor saxophone in a leery, elusive tone, sometimes using short, terse phrases, sometimes wriggling like a snake in the grass. At 27, she has already become an integral player on New York’s contemporary jazz scene — a fact borne out by the rich cast of collaborators who will join her at the Stone. Highlights will include her trio performance on Tuesday, featuring Mary Halvorson on guitar and Anaïs Maviel on voice and percussion; and her show on Jan. 9 with Amirtha Kidambi on voice, Joel Ross on vibraphone, Nick Dunston on bass and Savannah Harris on drums.
thestonenyc.com

DARIUS JONES QUARTET at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 7-8, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Darius Jones’s alto saxophone sound is bulbous and bawling, but it’s also sharp enough to cut deep, lodging itself in your mind. Expanding on a tradition set down by improvisers like Ornette Coleman and James Blood Ulmer, he shows how blues, Southern gospel and German experimentalism can all be folded together in the increasingly esoteric language of avant-garde jazz, giving the music a sense of grounding and physicality. These concerts at the Jazz Gallery will be recorded by the group Giant Step Arts, presumably for release as a live album. Jones appears here in a new quartet, featuring Joel Ross on vibraphone, Dezron Douglas on bass and Kush Abadey on drums. (Sean Conly will take Douglas’s place on Wednesday.)
646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
SEAN JONES ELECTRIC QUARTET at Jazz Standard (Jan. 2-5, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Propelled by an ebullient, masterly improvising style, Sean Jones stepped into the jazz spotlight 15 years ago when he took the first-trumpet chair in the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra. He has been known ever since as one of jazz’s finest trumpeters; he did a stint in the illustrious SFJAZZ Collective, and recently became the head of jazz studies at the Peabody Institute. Here he performs with his Electric Quartet, featuring Brett Williams on piano, Kyle Miles on bass and Kendrick Scott on drums.
212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
NEW EAR FESTIVAL at Fridman Gallery (Jan. 6-12). What at first may seem like any other Lower East Side visual-art gallery actually doubles as a home for experimental performances, sound installations and other forms of mixed-media work. The New Ear Festival, now in its fifth year, is a weeklong showcase for improvising musicians, sound artists and performers of various stripes. Among the highlights this year are Wednesday night’s event, headlined by Tariq Trotter, known as Black Thought, of the Roots, and featuring an appearance by the South African vocalist Vuyo Sotashe; the premier on Thursday of a new work by the bassist Brandon Lopez; and an interactive performance by the drummer Susie Ibarra and her DreamTime Ensemble on Jan. 10.
917-262-0612, fridmangallery.com
LENNY WHITE at Made in New York Jazz Cafe & Bar (Jan. 3-4 and 10-11, 7 and 9 p.m.; Jan. 5 and 12, 6 and 8 p.m.). White is celebrating his 70th birthday, which was last month, with performances over the next two weekends featuring a rotating lineup of all-star collaborators. White is best known as the drummer who appeared on Miles Davis’s watershed jazz-rock album “Bitches Brew,” then spent much of the coming decade in Return to Forever. In the years since, he has led many of his own fusion-oriented projects, though he’s also been known to settle into a sizzling swing feel when playing in more straight-ahead scenarios. At this run, it’s safe to expect a wide variety. On Friday he appears with the bassist Christian McBride and the pianist Christian Sands; on Saturday with the saxophonist Dave Liebman and the bassist Gene Perla; and on Sunday with the saxophonist Mike Lee, the guitarist Dave Stryker and the bassist Ed Howard.
718-640-7000, jazzcafe.nyc
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO