Impeachment Trial: The Opening Round
To the Editor:
Re “G.O.P. Blocks Bids to Add Evidence at Start of Trial” (front page, Jan. 22):
Until today, I have always been proud to say I am an attorney. I’ve heard all the lawyer jokes about sleazy lawyers who will say and do anything, tell lies with impunity, to help their clients win. But I always laughed them away with the belief that they depicted a sad but small minority.
Now I am no longer laughing because it is no joke. President Trump’s lawyers blatantly lied in their legal brief. They have argued that impeachment based on abuse of power is a “radical” concept and that the framers did not want Congress to judge whether presidents abused their discretion. When a majority of constitutional scholars agree that impeachment is the very tool available to Congress to stop a president’s abuse of power, saying that theory is radical and unfounded is a baldfaced lie.
Lawyers may make arguments to a court based on differing analyses of the facts. But they cannot misrepresent the facts. Today I am ashamed to be part of a profession that includes the lawyers representing Mr. Trump.
Rosie Rees
Evanston, Ill.
To the Editor:
Forty-five years ago I fled Communism. On Tuesday night I watched the first day of the Senate impeachment trial, which, I felt, was not unlike a dissident’s court case in Vietnam — it is likely that no witnesses will be called or documents allowed to be presented, only state-generated photos and video clips are provided, and a ready-made ruling is seemingly in store. The only difference is that the defendant in the Senate case — the president of the United States — will most likely be acquitted.
Anna Thai Nguyen
Sacramento
To the Editor:
What an embarrassment to American citizens to have such partisan nonsense governing our nation. First a sham House impeachment “investigation.” Now a sham Senate trial. Millions of tax dollars and hundreds of hours wasted, which should have been used to get our do-nothing Congress to work for the people by focusing on urgent issues such as health care, border security and rebuilding our antiquated infrastructure.
Fortunately, our impeached president seems to be the only one who is working on our behalf around the globe and here domestically. Perhaps it is the members of the House and the Senate who should be “impeached.”
Peter Stern
Driftwood, Tex.
To the Editor:
The most important development of the opening day of the impeachment trial happened behind closed doors. According to reports, a group of about 15 senators forced Mitch McConnell to change the Senate rules for the trial. Mitch McConnell does not like to be told what to do. Mitch McConnell likes to rule with an iron fist. To him negotiations means do it his way or hit the highway, but on Tuesday 15 brave Republican senators stood up to the tyrant and said, No.
This may indicate that there are Republicans who want to be on the right side of history, and this could get very interesting very quickly.
Neil J. Blum
Glenview, Ill.
To the Editor:
This is nuts. It is almost midnight and I’m trying to watch the trial. I’m exhausted. I cannot imagine how it must be for the senators. How in the world is this a fair and impartial trial? The Senate majority doesn’t want truth to see daylight — in both the metaphorical and real sense.
Suzanne Smythe
Essex, Conn.
To the Editor:
Not only has the Senate begun its impeachment trial as a raw, partisan struggle, but the media is doing the same. It is not serving us. On this first evening of the trial, I have been switching back and forth between Fox News, CNN and MSNBC to hear how they handle coverage of the House managers’ presentation. It is stunning — and very disquieting.
While CNN and MSNBC are covering the presentation, on Fox Tucker Carlson is interviewing a range of colleagues as voice-over while showing only images of House managers presenting the case. It is no wonder that the Fox audience is sheltered from the actual news. I encourage people to try it; jump back and forth and make your own comparison as this trial goes forward.
Susan Graseck
Providence, R.I.
To the Editor:
I was traveling in an airplane and each seat had a TV on the back. As I walked down the aisle, I saw that no one — no one — was watching the impeachment except me. Just saying.
Daniel Dziedzic
Rochester Hills, Mich.