New Rules for Californians
Good morning.
(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)
On Friday, we took a close look at one of the highest profile laws to take effect in California at the start of the year, aimed at giving consumers new rights to know what personal data companies are collecting and how they’re using it.
But at the beginning of the year, lots more laws officially went into effect. Hundreds of them.
(To be more specific, 870 laws were enacted in last year’s regular session, according to a state report. But some of them — like Assembly Bill 420, which established a cannabis research program — went into effect immediately, while others won’t go into effect until later.)
As I’ve mentioned, we’ll dig into some of the more complicated new rules in coming weeks.
The state’s new rent cap, a major step meant to address the housing crisis, is one of those.
And Mark Baldassare, the president and chief executive of the nonprofit Public Policy Institute of California, told me that in addition to the aforementioned consumer privacy law, there are a lot of unsettled questions about the rollout of the state’s landmark gig labor law.
[Read more about new laws around the country.]
Just recently, a federal judge temporarily blocked that law, known as Assembly Bill 5, from affecting more than 70,000 independent truckers. But freelance journalists and photographers won’t be temporarily exempted.
“It’s a controversial law that passed and people are just beginning to learn some of the unintended consequences,” Mr. Baldassare said.
Here are some of the other new laws you should know about:
Criminal justice and gun control
Health care
In the workplace
If you want to read more, The Los Angeles Times put together a helpful comprehensive interactive. Or, if you prefer, CalMatters made this series of one-minute explainer videos for some of the new rules.
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
And here’s more about Los Angeles’s Green New Deal. [The New York Times]
Also, here’s the latest article in The Times’s and ProPublica’s coverage of McKinsey’s influence over governments and agencies like Immigration and Customs Enforcement. [The New York Times]
Read more about Ms. Wilson, whom loved ones described as a bright 18-year-old robbed of a promising future. [The New York Times]
Also, here’s how to help the victims of those blazes. [The New York Times]
Before he appeared on “The Simpsons,” before he was recognized around the world as a leading conceptual artist and builder of Los Angeles’s contemporary art scene, John Baldessari was a child in National City, just south of San Diego, where he was raised by parents who grew their own fruits and vegetables and composted waste. His father was a salvage dealer.
That, he once explained, made it tough for him to throw anything away.
“I just stare at something and say: Why isn’t that art? Why couldn’t that be art?”
It was a way of seeing that informed much of the rest of his decades-long career.
Mr. Baldessari died last week at home in Venice at age 88. Here’s more about his life and legacy.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.