Covering Harvey Weinstein
Certain stories demand our attention, over and over. That’s how we feel about the story of Harvey Weinstein.
Today’s episode about his criminal trial in Manhattan, which began this week, marks the eighth time we’ve devoted a show to the subject.
From the beginning, the story of Weinstein, the allegations against him of a pattern of sexual misconduct and the system that facilitated it — which became the subject of a Pulitzer Prize-winning line of coverage in The Times by our colleagues Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey — has sent shockwaves across the United States and the world. It ignited a social movement and forced a social and political reckoning over sex, power and accountability that is still playing out.
Our coverage began in the fall of 2017 with Jodi and Megan’s original investigation, which they laid out in detail on the show. The episode introduced Weinstein to listeners — a prominent, wealthy and well-connected Hollywood figure accused of serially abusing women in the entertainment industry.
Next, we explored the impact of Megan and Jodi’s investigation, which prompted dozens of new accusers to come forward, including a woman named Katherine Kendall, who told us her harrowing story on the show.
Soon after, when the actress Ashley Judd, another Weinstein accuser, filed a lawsuit against Weinstein — not for sexual misconduct, but for the damage he did to her career — we looked at the economic toll of sexual harassment and whether the law sufficiently protects against it.
As Megan and Jodi’s reporting deepened, we examined the apparatus of complicity around Weinstein that allegedly allowed him to repeatedly abuse women, year after year, without legal or, seemingly, professional consequence.
Then, as Megan and Jodi finished a book about Weinstein that brought new revelations about his conduct, we explored a lesser-told part of the story: the role of the famous feminist mother-and-daughter lawyers Gloria Allred and Lisa Bloom in reinforcing the legal system that many people believe kept Weinstein’s conduct secret for so long.
Finally, as Weinstein’s trial began in New York, we turned to Jodi and Megan for two more episodes, which ran yesterday and today, that explained why a case that involved more than 80 accusers had turned into a criminal trial with just two plaintiffs.
Now, as the trial gets underway and an investigation that began in the pages of The Times becomes a criminal case in a courtroom, we encourage you to revisit those episodes, especially if you missed them the first time around, for a look at how the Weinstein case unfolded. As for us, we will continue to cover the story as urgently as ever.
Talk to Michael on Twitter: @mikiebarb.
This week, after scattering to the four corners of the earth over the holidays, our producers returned to the office with a surprising unity of mind:
Monday: Helene Cooper on the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani: What the administration “will have to answer to the American people,” she tells us, “is whether or not this assassination was worth it.”
Tuesday: “What we’ve seen is that the U.S. has effectively turned General Suleimani into a martyr.” Farnaz Fassihi looks at Iran’s reaction to the death of its most powerful military commander.
Wednesday: John Bolton, the former national security adviser, said he would be willing to testify in the impeachment trial. Will the Senate let him do it? We asked Julie Hirschfeld Davis.
Thursday: Law enforcement pressured Lucia Evans to cooperate in the case they were building against Harvey Weinstein. Then they dropped her from the case.
Friday: In Part 2 of our Weinstein story, Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey explain why, after more than 80 women came forward with allegations of sexual misconduct against the film producer, the criminal charges he’s facing in New York center on just two.
Have thoughts about the show? Tell us what you think at thedaily@nytimes.com.
Were you forwarded this newsletter? Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox.
Love podcasts? Join The New York Times Podcast Club on Facebook.