What’s on TV Tuesday: ‘Schitt’s Creek’ and ‘Jeopardy! The Greatest of All Time’
SCHITT’S CREEK 9 p.m. on Pop. It’s the beginning of the end for this light Canadian sitcom. The Rose family has (mostly) grown accustomed to Schitt’s Creek, a rural town they bought as a joke gift and then moved to after losing their fortune. In the Season 5 finale — beware, spoilers ahead — Patrick (Noah Reid) and David (Dan Levy) got engaged, Moira (Catherine O’Hara) celebrated the premiere of her “Cabaret” production, and Stevie (Emily Hampshire) had a what-am-I-doing-with-my-life moment. The sixth and final season opens with David on the hunt for a wedding venue and Johnny (Eugene Levy) and Moira enjoying a romantic picnic. The show received Emmy recognition for the first time last year, earning four nominations. In an interview with The New York Times, Eugene Levy, who created the series with his son, Dan, said he thought Season 6 would be the strongest yet and that “the series is ending in a way that wraps this up with a lovely bow.”
JEOPARDY!: THE GREATEST OF ALL TIME 8 p.m. on ABC. This is the moment “Jeopardy!” fanatics have been waiting for. The show’s three record-breaking contestants — Ken Jennings, Brad Rutter and James Holzhauer — will compete in a series of one-hour shows airing over several nights. The first to win three matches walks away with $1 million and the title “greatest of all time.” The runners-up will each receive $250,000. Holzhauer captivated viewers last year by setting the record for the most money won during one game ($110,914), and then surpassing it three more times. He became a minor celebrity, and the special tournament allows the show to ride the wave of the popularity of all three contestants.
ZOEY’S EXTRAORDINARY PLAYLIST 10 p.m. on NBC. Fans of “Glee” or “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” may want to tune into this whimsical new dramedy. While the protagonist, Zoey (Jane Levy), a young coder in San Francisco, is in the middle of getting an MRI, an earthquake causes the machine to malfunction. Soon, Zoey starts to hear the thoughts and secrets of those around her in the form of pop songs. The catch? Only she can see and hear the musical numbers. In this pilot episode, Zoey tries to determine whether her new ability is a blessing or a curse. She gets something of an answer when her father (Peter Gallagher), who has a rare neurological disease that has left him immobile and unable to communicate, comes alive through the music.
SILENT WITNESS Stream on BritBox. This dark British procedural returns for a 23rd season. Emilia Fox stars as Nikki Alexander, the head of a team of forensic pathologists who solve grisly crimes. In the first case of the season, a private jet crashes outside of London, with a former American ambassador among the passengers. At the same time, Thomas (Richard Lintern) looks into a businessman’s apparent suicide that has ties to the crash.