The True Story of a Medieval Romeo and Juliet
THE CONVERT
By Stefan Hertmans


Vigdis Adelaïs Gudbrandr was born in Rouen in 1070, the daughter of a wealthy Christian family, her mother a Norman aristocrat and her father descended from Vikings. When she was 17, the blond-haired, blue-eyed beauty ran away with David Todros, a visiting yeshiva student from Narbonne. Her enraged father sent his knights to bring her back, offering a fine reward. But to no avail: She married David, converted to Judaism (taking the name Sarah Hamoutal Todros) and traveled with her husband to Moniou, a small village in the south of France, where the first of her four children was born. A few years later, soldiers of the First Crusade sacked the village and burned the synagogue; her husband was murdered and two of her children abducted. Tragedy and disaster pursued her for the rest of her life, setting her on the road to Marseille, Palermo, Alexandria, Cairo, possibly Nájera in Spain and back to France, on a quest as desperate as it was brutal.
The Belgian novelist Stefan Hertmans resides in the same Provençal town — now Monieux — where Sarah, her young husband and their children lived in hiding. Some years ago, a neighbor who shares his love of history sent Hertmans a 1969 article detailing the known facts of the convert’s life. One morning, after reading this article, Hertmans watches from his window two travelers making their way down from the hills, a man and a pregnant woman who walks with difficulty. He imagines that they are 11th-century refugees seeking shelter with the local rabbi. “They wind a faltering path to his house — close to the spot where a thousand years later I will spend summer after summer blithely reading, as happy as I’ve ever been anywhere in this mundane world.”
This compression of a millennium inside a single sentence — a contemporary writer gazing through his window at a medieval world — introduces us to the novelistic sleight of hand Hertmans is intent on bringing off. His brief is to obliterate time by clinging resolutely to the present (and most pictorial) tense. He will stick to it throughout, alternating Hamoutal’s increasingly harrowing flight with his own peregrinations to the places “in this mundane world” where he might find evidence of her passage. “Time,” he observes, “does its own thing.”
Hertmans’s task in reconstructing the life of Hamoutal is formidable, as he knows better than anyone. One salient document, a letter Hamoutal carried with her from France, was recovered in 1864 from the genizah of a Cairo synagogue. This faded and torn page of 11th-century parchment is now preserved between sheets of plastic in a binder in the university library at Cambridge.
Hertmans makes an appointment to examine it. Beyond that, his research methods are primitive; his plan is to go to the places where he thinks she might have gone. He sets out in his car for Rouen, intending to view the remains of the yeshiva where David studied.
One of the great challenges of writing historical fiction is deploying the research without calling attention to it. Hertmans dismisses this obligation with a bold announcement: Hey, I did research! We see Vigdis in her daily life, praying in her chapel, buttering her hair, walking with her chaperone, flirting with a Jewish boy outside the yeshiva wall, and then — wait, here’s Hertmans again, doing his research. Wherever he looks, he sees her and, knowing her fate, he fears for her. “Does this girl know what she’s getting into?” he cries out with paternal outrage. “Of course not, how could she? She is the one who will have to learn to live on a different planet, in a different calendar. She vaults into terra incognita, blind and overexcited, reckless and naïve. She does it for those eyes and that little beard, for that smile and that strange excitement, for that yellow cap perched on the crown of his head, for the unknown and the adventure that draws her in, for that cloud of dazzling brightness in her muddled head. She has seen the white unicorn and wanders delirious through a wood of ancient prohibitions.”
My first inclination was to balk at this authorial intrusion, but Hertmans is so honestly frustrated and miserable in the modern world that I felt sorry for him. His sources contradict one another; he keeps trying to touch something David or Hamoutal touched; he gets lost in time; thinks he sees her on the street; he strives. In the 10th-century crypt of a church in Clermont-Ferrand, he imagines Vigdis in prayer, bidding farewell to her Christian god. Sadly, he knows what she couldn’t have known: that in a few years, in a field outside this same church, Pope Urban II will call on the faithful to undertake the First Crusade, and that “this will have the incidental, irreversible effect of ruining her life in the distant village in Vaucluse.” History: You just can’t see it coming.
Driving at night on a “black, deserted highway, staring into passing headlights as if a film’s opening credits were going on forever,” Hertmans despairs of finding Hamoutal. “My delusive longing to sense some genuine vestige of this woman has culminated in the awareness that she’s no longer present anywhere, except in my imagination.” His research will take him from Cambridge to Cairo, but he’s always eager to get back to Monieux, to look out his window or walk in the ancient, dry, unproductive landscape Hamoutal must have known. He sits in a field of dry grass all afternoon, “watching the shifting light on the plateau.” He wants to be buried there. The reader can’t help wishing him well. He’s quite a character.
In both “The Convert” and his previous novel, the highly praised “War and Turpentine,” Hertmans habitually treats the reader to his process. This has inspired critics to invoke the hallowed name of W. G. Sebald, and to bandy about the label “literary hybrid” — a vile designation, calling to mind a hybrid car, or beefalo. There’s just no need for such hairsplitting. The novel is an astonishingly capacious form; like Whitman, it can contain multitudes.
“The Convert,” briskly translated from the Dutch by David McKay, is an imaginative flight, full of darkness and light, lively characters, life-altering conflicts, violence and kindness, birth, death and, oddly, a lot of snakes. It is, as it says right there on the cover, nothing less than a novel. And it’s a really good one.