What’s on TV Sunday: ‘The L Word: Generation Q’ and the Grammys
THE L WORD: GENERATION Q 10 p.m. on Showtime. This reboot of the “The L Word,” the pioneering series about lesbian life in Los Angeles, wraps up its first season. The mayoral candidate Bette (Jennifer Beals) is on the edge of her seat, waiting for the results on election night. While Shane (Katherine Moennig) and Quiara (Lex Scott Davis) face another bump in the road, Alice (Leisha Hailey) takes a risk with her show after a devastating drop in ratings. In her review for The New York Times, Elisabeth Vincentelli wrote that while “The L Word” “now better reflects Los Angeles’s ethnic and gender diversity,” it still needs some fine tuning. The original series “always stood on shaky, uncritical ground when it came to money and class, and ‘Generation Q’ offers little progress in that regard.” Fans who welcomed this sequel can breathe a sigh of relief: Showtime recently renewed it for a second season.
THE 62ND ANNUAL GRAMMY AWARDS 8 p.m. on CBS. A dark cloud hangs over Sunday night’s ceremony: Deborah Dugan, the suspended chief executive of the Recording Academy, was recently placed on leave over accusations of bullying behavior and a request for a multimillion-dollar payout. Dugan has denied the charges and responded with her own allegations, saying the academy was punishing her for unveiling misconduct. As the intense showdown plays out behind-the-scenes, several of this year’s nominees will take the stage for performances. Among them are Lizzo (with eight nominations), Billie Eilish (six) and Lil Nas X (also six).
THE CIRCUS 8 p.m. on Showtime. This documentary series, which follows the biggest stories under the Trump administration, is back for Season 5. This premiere focuses on the early days of President Trump’s impeachment trial: Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota make crucial appearances in Iowa before heading to the capital for the trial, while their opponents, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., have the state all to themselves. For more political entertainment, tune into the third season premiere of OUR CARTOON PRESIDENT at 8:30.
MY BEST FRIEND’S WEDDING (1997) Stream on Hulu; Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. This classic romantic comedy stars Julia Roberts as Julianne, a restaurant critic in New York who gets a troubling phone call: Michael (Dermot Mulroney), her best friend whom she made a marriage pact with, is marrying someone else (Cameron Diaz). Julianne suddenly realizes she’s in love with him and sets out to crash his wedding in Chicago with only four days to go. Instead, she ends up becoming his bride’s maid of honor, and her plan to tell Michael the truth goes haywire. Watching Roberts beam, Janet Maslin wrote in her review for The Times, “is a lot more fun than sitting through the film’s bad karaoke episode.”