Amy Klobuchar’s ‘Doggedness and Diligence’
To the Editor:
Re “Amy Klobuchar Raised $11.4 Million in Fourth Quarter, Her Campaign Says” (nytimes.com, Jan. 3):
Last fall my brother and sister-in-law hosted an event for Amy Klobuchar. It overflowed their small home.
People left impressed, though not everyone pledged to caucus for her or took a yard sign with them. It was a get-acquainted opportunity with a candidate who is characterized by strong suits like doggedness and diligence, which are time-released by definition.
As the field winnows, she is still standing, like the green Amy sign I came home with that night and planted in our yard. It wobbles on windy days, but is rooted deep enough to withstand winter in parts like these and New Hampshire. After that, we’ll see if her campaign can muster enough financial fertilizer to blossom in the springtime.
Ms. Klobuchar might end up bolstering the Democratic ticket even if she’s not atop it.
Mike Wellman
Des Moines
To the Editor:
Re “Real Charity: Pay Workers Living Wage” (DealBook, Dec. 24):
In reference to Andrew Ross Sorkin’s suggestion that management and employees question and address their company’s compensation inequality, I suggest that individuals ask themselves the same question.
Who is the poorest person you know? Is it your nanny, your house cleaner/housekeeper, your gardener, your dog walker, your mother’s caregiver? You could pay them more, and not just as a year-end bonus.
Jean Arnold
Mendocino, Calif.
To the Editor:
Re “For Brain Health, Correct Mild Hearing Loss” (Personal Health, Dec. 31):
Jane Brody’s article on untreated hearing loss provided readers with an excellent overview on research documenting the critical need for those with adult-onset hearing loss to seek treatment. Untreated hearing loss has been linked to dementia, an increased risk of falls and, of course, increased social isolation and depression.
While Ms. Brody is right that by 2021 low-cost over-the-counter hearing aids are expected to be available, these will be appropriate only for those with a mild to moderate hearing loss. And I would never encourage those who are struggling now to wait until 2021. At least start the process by having a hearing test done by an audiologist and get your questions answered about all of the new and upcoming options.
Laurie Hanin
New York
The writer is executive director of the Center for Hearing and Communication.