Before and After the Golden Globes, From Red Carpet to the After-Parties
An incredibly apolitical red carpet preceded the Golden Globes last night — and here are all our pictures from before the show, and all the parties after the show. (Though the best place to see the red carpet is on our Instagram.)
Hollywood’s full return to red carpet business as usual, while the rest of the country is gripped by anxiety or excitement over America’s escalated hostilities with Iran and while the world watches Australia burn, seemed, at best, kind of distasteful or maybe just clueless?
Here’s a counterpoint though: “The most striking, memorable styles of the night were not easy-to-digest dresses,” writes our fashion critic Vanessa Friedman. “They weren’t even necessarily all that flattering. They were challenging. They were gloriously, sometimes ridiculously, risky. Sometimes they were just ridiculous.”
She notes that the red carpet is haunted by the ghost of Harvey Weinstein, who brokered fashion deals with talent as mannequins, most particularly for his former spouse’s fashion brand. His trial for rape starts today. (And while that may sound serious, remember that more than 80 people have accused him of assault or harassment — and in this courtroom, “the jurors will be hearing a narrow legal case, with an already-fraught back story and a highly unpredictable result.”)
I’m the first to encourage everyone to dress up and have a good time in this short life. But — apart from Tiffany Haddish, who seems to always be having a good time, and Tom Hanks, who lives in a perpetual state of peace — was anyone really having a good time on this red carpet? Although it looked fun and carefree, it also looked costly, and I don’t just mean the hair and the jewels and the dresses.
Stars know that fashion contracts pay well — better than indie films — but sometimes when you sell your time and your image, you wake up feeling not so great. Money can only buy you so much.
The good news is, though, if you found the red carpet a bit free of politics, many attendees — notably Michelle Williams — saved their politics for an even bigger moment on the stage.
Anyway, here’s a look at all the hottest stars last night — and a list of who won! Did you?
Email your thoughts and feedback to wait@nytimes.com. Or just @ us on Instagram right here.