I Went to a Brexit Celebration Party
On Friday afternoon I went to the Brexit Celebration Party in Parliament Square, in London, across from the Palace of Westminster and Big Ben, and, at first, I laughed.
It is fashionable and easy to laugh at Brexiteers, even if it is hollow; the laughter of those who have lost. Nigel Farage, the man who essentially took us from Europe, waved a tiny Union Flag at his final appearance in the European Parliament on Wednesday, a flag so tiny it belonged in a Brexit cocktail. But Mr. Farage’s seeming triviality is his strength. It makes people underestimate him, and his supporters are no different.
There was more laughter over whether Big Ben would “bong” as we left the European Union at 11 p.m. on Friday. It emerged that it could not because the clock is being repaired. There is, in an exquisite metaphor for the recent paralysis in British democracy, no mechanism for the clock at the moment, and there is also no floor. We could not even ask not for whom the bell tolls until the problem was solved. So, they played prerecorded “bongs.”
It is easy to laugh, but laughter is not an effective political tool, because the only people laughing with you are those who agree. Even so, subversive political movements attract eccentrics, and eccentrics arrive early. By teatime the square looked like a costume party for exhibitionists trawling for media coverage.
An Elvis impersonator sang “Are You Lonesome Tonight?” — addressing Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the Labour Party, who had no coherent policy on Brexit. I met a man who told me he predicted Brexit as early as 1972 by analyzing verses from the Bible. He felt a mixture “of heart and intellect. Not just heart. Prior knowledge.” He spoke on and on, with barely a pause, like a man who had never been listened to before.
I had a serious conversation about post-Brexit trade negotiations with a man dressed as King Richard the Lionheart, but with silver Lurex where his chain mail ought to have been. He was carrying a placard that read, “Boris = BRINO” (Brexit in Name Only). It was proper that he was dressed for warfare, because he was awaiting another betrayal from the government. “I don’t believe that what Boris is doing is achieving a proper Brexit. But hopefully I’m wrong,” he told me.
As I walked down from the square toward Downing Street, the residence of the prime minister, I realized that I had not heard such a swath of regional accents in central London before; from people of various ethnicities and from all classes. Men in fine suits stood with working men and women from as far north as Cumbria, a county on the Scottish border.
What united everyone was an obsession with sovereignty: “I like to be able to choose who’s telling me what to do,” said one woman. “In the E.U. we’ve got no power.” “Our farming has gone,” said her friend, “our businesses. They tell us what we can farm, what we can do.” Then they lapsed into conspiracy theories: “They are like a dictatorship,” said the first woman, of the European Union. “Communists,” said the other, “it’s something like the same structure.”
It was more somber than I had imagined, partly because the battle has been exhausting. Brexiteers are all called racists and fools, which is unfair, because only some are. Many respectable Brexiteers feel silenced and aggrieved, but you barely hear or see them for the bells and flags. One man, who was quietly drunk, told me about a woman he met when he was manning a stall for the U.K. Independence Party in 2012. “She came close, she put her hand up over her mouth and said, ‘I’m voting for you,’ and carried on walking. That kept me going,” he said, “I think of that lady who wanted independence but was too scared to ask for a leaflet.”
It was also somber because the relief — the psychological need — for some is in believing yourself in peril from a Continental Europe you are — and this is crucial — separated from by the sea. Britain was endangered in World War II, but she was not overrun; psychologically we do not need the European Union as much as Continental Europe does. Peril, then, from the Continent, both comforting — it has always been like this, invaders always came by sea — and frightening. I think that was why I saw so many medieval knights armed for slightly drunken warfare.
I met a man who said simply: “I’m sorry it’s over.” He looked disconsolate. “I feel flat because I enjoyed the battle. I enjoyed being with my side. Tonight, we’re going to go and it’s all over.”
The prerecorded bongs sounded fine in the end. The Brexiteers left the square to go to a home that means something different now. I think of William Makepeace Thackeray, and his words in “Vanity Fair”: “Which of us has his desire, or, having it, is satisfied?”
What will Brexiteers yearn for now they have won? And who will they blame if it is not enough?