U.K. Leaves E.U., Embarking On an Uncertain Future
At 11 p.m. — midnight in Brussels and 6 p.m. in New York — Britain officially left the European Union. Flags lined Parliament Square and the Mall, the ceremonial avenue leading to Buckingham Palace, and government buildings were lit up in the red, white and blue of the Union Jack.
A countdown clock was projected onto the front of 10 Downing Street, the prime minister’s official residence, along with a commemorative light display to “symbolize the strength and unity” of the United Kingdom.
“This is not an end but a beginning,” Prime Minister Bris Johnson said in a speech to the nation shortly before the official departure. “This is the moment when the dawn breaks and the curtain goes up on a new act.”
The departure, 1,317 days after Britain voted to leave the bloc, carries not only enormous symbolic weight, but also significant legal consequences. It concluded three years of fractious debates over whether the country should really leave the bloc, the terms of its departure and the kind of relationship it should forge with Europe.
“We’ll have a couple months of people trying not to talk about it again, trying to pretend it’s not a thing that’s happening,” said Amanda Chetwynd-Cowieson, who led a group that tried to overturn Brexit. “But realistically it’s not going to be sorted in a year. It’s going to start rearing its head and opening divisions within families again.”
The departure marks the start of a transition period in which London and Brussels will hash out the terms of their future ties.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson and his cabinet began Friday with a meeting in Sunderland, a city in northern England that was the first to announce it had voted in favor of leaving the European Union on the night of the 2016 referendum.
It was the first of a handful of celebratory, but noticeably muted, official events to mark the day, suggesting that the pro-Brexit government wanted to avoid the appearance of gloating. In the referendum, 48 percent of voters wanted to remain part of the European Union, and later polls suggest that number may have grown since.
In the years of debate over Britain’s exit from the European Union, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was never one for nuance, even declaring that he would “rather be dead in a ditch” than see Brexit delayed again.
But as the hour of reckoning approached, Downing Street was remarkably subdued, not wanting to rub salt in the still raw wounds of those who desperately wanted to remain — about half the country.
When he addressed the nation at 10 p.m., an hour before the official departure, Mr. Johnson struck a hopeful and conciliatory note.
“Our job as the government, my job, is to bring this country together and take us forward,” he said.
Of course, the next year of negotiations over Britain’s new trade relationship with the European Union will play a large role in determining what the future will hold.
But that concern was for another day. Mr. Johnson, instead, used his remarks to try to persuade the public that Brexit was “not an end but a beginning.”
“This is the dawn of a new era in which we no longer accept that your life chances — your family’s life chances — should depend on which part of the country you grow up in,” he said. “This is the moment when we begin to unite and level up.”


President Emmanuel Macron of France called Britain’s departure from the bloc a “historic alarm signal that must ring in each of our countries to be heard by all of Europe and make us reflect.”
In a video statement released Friday evening, Mr. Macron described it as “a sad day.”
“There is no denying it," he added, “but it is also a day that must lead us to proceed differently.” He called for a “powerful” and “efficient” European Union.
Mr. Macron said the 2016 Leave campaign in Britain was based on “lies, exaggerations, simplifications” and on “checks that were promised and will never arrive.”
“Brexit was made possible because too often we made Europe the scapegoat of our own difficulties,” Mr. Macron said. Still, he said, the European Union needs to change and “we have not changed our Europe enough.”
And the need for a unified Europe is greater than ever, Mr. Macron said. He checked off a list of challenges — facing powers like China and the United States, tackling immigration and global warming, transitioning to a digital economy — that he said were best addressed by the bloc.
“But I am aware that Europe will only be able to continue going forward if we deeply reform it to make it more sovereign, more democratic, closer to our fellow citizens and therefore simpler in its day-to-day life,” Mr. Macron said.
Mr. Macron also tried to reassure the French that they would not “wake up tomorrow morning with different rules.” France will pick up five seats in the European Parliament left vacant by the British departure, he noted, but immediate changes otherwise would be limited.
Mr. Macron said he would fight for French interests in negotiations over the future relationship between Britain and the European Union, arguing that he wanted “the closest, strongest, most durable partnership as possible” but that it would never be the same as the one Britain had as a member of the union.
“One cannot be both inside and outside,” Mr. Macron said.
France and Britain will continue to have a strong bilateral relationship, he said, tied as the two countries are by “a long history, made of blood, of freedom, of courage, of fights that we shared.”
Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte of Italy said his country would work through the bloc to ensure that Britain remains a “privileged and strategic partner” in a trade agreement without quotas, tariffs or dumping.
He said would meet with Prime Minister Boris Johnson next week to discuss the transition.
“There isn’t much time to work on a serious and effective free exchange accord,” Mr. Conte told the Confederation of Italian Agriculture, meeting to celebrate its 100th anniversary. “A lot is at stake.”
“It won’t be easy,” he said, adding that the bloc’s negotiators must “find a balance between protecting our production from deals that London could make with other countries.”
“We want facts,” Mr. Conte said, “to follow words.”
Hundreds of Europeans lined up at City Hall in London on Friday to get advice about their future in Britain after it leaves the bloc.
“They tell us the application is easy, but everyone has unique circumstances and there can be complications,” said Laurie Bassot, a French citizen.
Ms. Bassot said she will be allowed to stay in the country for five years under her “presettled status,” but she was worried about her future prospects.
“It is a stressful process,” she said. “I have a job, a husband and children in school. I want to know how long I will be able to stay.”
Along with legal experts, counselors were available at City Hall to provide emotional support.
“There are lots of European citizens who feel anxious during this uncertain period so it is important for us to provide free services to support them,” said one of them, Dan Thomson.
The leader of Gibraltar, a British territory at the southern tip of Spain, pledged that the thousands of Spaniards who cross the border daily to work there will not face the loss of their jobs or new obstacles as a result of Brexit.
“We want to continue to see them working in our economy,” said Gibraltar’s leader, Fabian Picardo, calling the Spaniards “a key part of our success and prosperity.”
Gibraltar’s 33,000 residents voted overwhelmingly against Brexit in the 2016 referendum.
Mr. Picardo also warned Spain and the European Union against any move that could undermine Gibraltar. “We will not accept any attempt to compromise our sovereignty, jurisdiction or control,” he said.
At the close of the business day in Brussels, Britain lowered the blue, yellow-starred European Union flag at its Brussels diplomatic post. The post becomes the British Embassy to the European Union at the stroke of midnight in Brussels.
Britain’s own flag comes down at midnight at the European Council and Parliament buildings.
Last year, Britain’s economy grew at its weakest pace since 2010, hampered by weak business investment. And now the Bank of England has lowered its expectations for growth this year  to 0.75 percent, from 1.25 percent.
At his final news conference on Thursday, Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, who has extended his tenure three times to accommodate Brexit, said that from an economic perspective, “the last decade ended with a whimper.”
Recently published figures have indicated an uptick in sentiment and activity since Britain’s December election produced a clear Conservative majority in Parliament, reducing uncertainty and clearing the way for a final decision on Brexit. As a result, the Bank of England decided it did not need to lower interest rates to bolster the economy. Still, Mr. Carney warned that a recovery was not guaranteed.
“To be clear, these are still early days, and it is less a case of ‘so far so good’ than ‘so far, good enough,’” he said. “Although early signs are encouraging, the recoveries in growth and inflation are also not yet assured.”
Christine Lagarde, Europe’s top central banker, said she was sorry that Britain was leaving the European Union, but offered assurances that the split could take place without disrupting the financial system.
“It is with great regret that we see our British friends leave the European Union,” Ms. Lagarde, president of the European Central Bank, said in a statement. “We will work hard to ensure Brexit causes as little disruption as possible for the citizens, employers and financial markets in the euro area and the rest of the E.U.”
The European Central Bank and the Bank of England have already set up a system to swap pounds and euros to ensure that banks don’t run short of either currency. Bank regulators on both sides have agreed to continue sharing information. And the European Central Bank has already issued licenses for 25 banks relocating from Britain to the euro currency zone.
Britain was never a member of the eurozone. But as a member of the European Union it contributed about 58 million euros, or $64 million, to the European Central Bank’s capital. It will now get that money back.
But fears that Brexit could hurt the European economy may already be proving justified. The eurozone grew only 0.1 percent during the last three months of 2019 compared with the previous quarter, according to official statistics published on Friday.
That was a significant slowdown from previous quarters and meant that the 19 countries in the eurozone grew only 1.2 percent during last year, according to a preliminary estimate.
“The specter of recession is back,” Christoph Weil, an economist at Commerzbank in Frankfurt, said in a note to investors on Friday.
Eurostat, the official statistics agency, didn’t give a reason for the slowdown. But one factor was probably the uncertainty caused by Brexit, which has made businesses hesitant to hire or to invest in expansion. Trade between the European Union and Britain has also shrunk since the country voted to leave.
Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany described Brexit as a “decisive turning point for us all,” in a video message released on Friday.
“Germany would like to remain a close partner and friend of Britain because we share common values,” she said. In the video, Ms. Merkel explains that the rights of British people living in the European Union had been ensured under the withdrawal agreement.
But for one German town, Britain’s departure meant a big change: losing their mayor of 12 years.
The mayor, Iain Macnab, is originally from Scotland but has lived in Brunsmark, a town of 161 people in northern Germany, since 1992. But he had to give up his office on Friday, as he will not be able to vote in municipal elections as he is no longer a European citizen.
According to local laws, Mr. Macnab cannot be elected to an office he is not allowed to vote for.
“It’s a bit sad,” Mr. Macnab said by telephone from the Town Hall on his last day in office. “It didn’t strike me until yesterday, when I had my last committee meeting.”
The former British ambassador to Washington fired a shot over the bow of the good ship Brexit on Friday, warning that President Trump would be likely to demand that the country’s revered National Health Service pay higher prices for American drugs in a potential post-Brexit trade deal.
Kim Darroch, who resigned from his post in July after critical comments he made about Mr. Trump were leaked, told The Guardian that the Trump administration would prioritize the demands of large American corporations and farmers who want more access to British markets.
“I know what the U.S. will be pitching for when they negotiate a free-trade deal with us,” Mr. Darroch said in the interview with The Guardian. “People talk about chlorinated chicken — it is a lot more than that.”
Currently, Britain’s National Health Service has a price cap on some pharmaceuticals, which pressures American drug firms to sell their products in Britain at a lower price.
“Do they want us to pay more for their pharmaceuticals? Do the pharmaceutical companies want to use this leverage? Of course, they do,” Mr. Darroch said.
In documents from 2017 that were later leaked, Mr. Darroch had described the Trump administration as “uniquely dysfunctional,” and called Mr. Trump “inept” and “insecure.” After the revelation, President Trump said he would no longer deal with the ambassador, and Mr. Darroch was forced to resign.
Before the row, Mr. Darroch had driven attempts to expand trade relations with the United States.
To mark Britain’s exit from the European Union, three million commemorative 50-pence coins are entering circulation, bearing the message “Peace, prosperity and friendship with all nations.”
Prime Minister Boris Johnson is to become one of the first owners of the coin on Friday when Sajid Javid, the chancellor of the Exchequer, plans to hand one over. Seven million more will come into use later in the year.
But as with almost everything Brexit-related, the short history of the coin, which has a face value equivalent to about 65 cents, has already been fraught. Production began ahead of a previously planned departure on Oct. 31, but when Brexit was pushed back to January, over a million coins had to be melted down.
When re-dated coins were unveiled, some people called for a boycott, either to display opposition to Brexit or because they find the message on the coin grammatically offensive.
“The ‘Brexit’ 50p coin is missing an Oxford comma, and should be boycotted by all literate people,” the novelist Philip Pullman wrote on Twitter, arguing that the inscription should instead read “Peace, prosperity, and friendship with all nations.”
For those who don’t mind the lack of the Oxford comma, a gold version of the coin was offered. But according to the royal mint, those coins — priced at 945 pounds, or about $1,240, each — are out of stock.
In an opinion article published across the European press, the presidents of the three main European Union institutions called Brexit Friday a “new dawn” for Europe.
After offering kind words on Britain’s departure, Ursula von der Leyen of the European Commission, Charles Michel of the European Council and David Sassoli of the European Parliament tried to strike an upbeat tone.
“We need to look to the future and build a new partnership between enduring friends,” they wrote. “Together, our three institutions will do everything in their power to make it a success. We are ready to be ambitious.”
The article was published alongside a cheery video touting the European Union’s economic and climate-friendly credentials and maintaining that its remaining 27 members were “#strongertogether.”
Brussels wants the message to be clear, because while Britain’s departure has yet to inspire strong withdrawal movements in other countries, as some expected immediately after the 2016 referendum, many Europeans are disillusioned with the project of ever closer union.
“We have a common vision of where we want to go and a commitment to be ambitious on the defining issues of our times,” the three presidents said. “That work continues as soon as the sun rises tomorrow.”