‘American Dirt’ Publisher Cancels Book Tour
Flatiron Books, the publisher of “American Dirt,” said Wednesday that it was canceling the author’s book tour because of safety concerns.
In a statement, Bob Miller, Flatiron’s president and publisher, said, “Based on specific threats to booksellers and the author, we believe there exists real peril to their safety.”
“American Dirt,” a novel by Jeanine Cummins about a Mexican woman and her son fleeing to the United States to escape cartel violence, came out last week and seemed poised to become one of the year’s biggest books. It made its debut at No. 1 on The New York Times’s best-seller list for hardcover and for combined print and e-book fiction this week. But the book has also encountered a backlash, with Latinx writers and community members criticizing Cummins’s depiction of the migrant experience and accusing her of appropriating it for profit.
Miller acknowledged some of the criticism in his statement, saying that “we made serious mistakes in the way we rolled out this book.” He added: “The discussion around this book has exposed deep inadequacies in how we at Flatiron Books address issues of representation, both in the books we publish and in the teams that work on them.”
He said “there have been threats of physical violence,” which prompted the cancellation. Instead, the publisher plans to organize town-hall-style meetings featuring Cummins and “some of the groups who have raised objections to the book.”
Some of the book’s critics, however, expressed skepticism about the threats. “We have no knowledge or involvement in these safety concerns,” said Roberto Lovato, a writer involved in the media campaign #DignidadLiteraria, which has encouraged debate over “American Dirt” and sought to highlight the works of other Latinx writers.
Cummins “has a right to come out and share her book like any other author,” Lovato said. “We have a right to be critical of what we consider bad literature that doesn’t represent the serious issues that we deal with every day.”
The controversy surrounding “American Dirt” “has sparked an overdue public conversation,” the free-speech nonprofit PEN America said in a statement.
“As defenders of freedom of expression, we categorically reject rigid rules about who has the right to tell which stories. We see no contradiction between that position and the need for the publishing industry to urgently address its own chronic shortcomings,” it added. “If the fury over this book can catalyze concrete change in how books are sourced, edited, and promoted, it will have achieved something important.”
PEN also condemned overheated online rhetoric and “vitriol aimed to shut down discussion and enforce silence.”
Another free speech organization, the American Booksellers for Free Expression, echoed those views in a statement on Wednesday, saying the group opposes “any actions expressly intended to cancel author or book events regarding ‘American Dirt’ or any title,” and advocating for the right of booksellers “to curate their stores and to schedule events as they see fit, in light of their communities and the staff.”
Flatiron originally planned an elaborate book tour for “American Dirt,” with appearances in 40 cities across the country. Some bookstores found themselves under pressure to pull the plug on their events even before the publisher’s announcement.
Valerie Koehler, the owner of Blue Willow Bookshop in Houston, canceled a signing this week for “American Dirt” after receiving multiple emails and phone calls from people who threatened to organize a boycott of the store and to protest during the signing. Blue Willow is still selling the book.
“The vitriol level on this has been high and pretty disturbing to me,” she said. “We felt like it was best we not subject our customers to that.”
Left Bank Books, an independent store in St. Louis, also called off an event with Cummins after receiving numerous messages urging the store to cancel her appearance. “We sincerely believed it would be an opportunity to have an overdue public conversation about the deplorable actions of our country towards people at the border,” a note on the store’s website says. The store said the criticisms “felt like a challenge to do better.”
“Everything was so escalated, we wanted to slow down, stop and back away,” said Kris Kleindienst, co-owner of Left Bank. “We are carrying the book and are happy to talk about it anytime.”
Oprah Winfrey, who selected “American Dirt” as her January book club pick, has also attracted criticism for her choice. She later said that she would “bring people together from all sides to talk about this book and who gets to publish what stories” and would stream the conversation on her Apple TV Plus show in March.
Members of #DignidadLiteraria said in a statement on Tuesday that they “have no interest in a dialogue with Jeanine Cummins” but would rather focus on systemic issues of inclusion within Oprah’s book club and the publishing industry.
On Wednesday, more than 80 writers, many of them award-winning novelists of color such as Carmen Maria Machado, Viet Thanh Nguyen and Luis Alberto Urrea, signed a letter asking Winfrey to reconsider her selection of “American Dirt.”
“The book club provides a seal of approval that can still, we hope, be changed,” read the letter that was published on Literary Hub. “The book is widely and strongly believed to be exploitative, oversimplified, and ill-informed, too often erring on the side of trauma fetishization and sensationalization of migration and of Mexican life and culture.”
Some booksellers said it was unfortunate that independent stores had been mired in the controversy.
“I really feel for these bookstores that are under pressure to cancel events that they were trying to host to engage the public in a broader discussion,” said Lissa Muscatine, the co-owner of Politics & Prose in Washington, D.C., which hosted an event with Cummins last week. “The public may have a right to be critical of the author, and our events make room for that.”
She added that the store hadn’t received any complaints from customers about the event for “American Dirt,” and that the conversation around the novel had been “very lively and very engaged.”