What Are Iowa’s Satellite Caucuses? And How Did They Help Bernie Sanders?
They caucused in Arizona, in Paris and in the former Soviet republic of Georgia; inside workplaces, on college campuses and at nursing homes; in Spanish and in American Sign Language.
Hundreds of Iowans who could not attend regular precinct caucuses expressed their preference in a new experiment conducted on Monday by the Iowa Democratic Party: satellite caucuses. Three days later, it now appears their participation may play a crucial role in deciding the outcome of a tight race.
With 99 percent of total precincts reporting, the race in Iowa still remains too close to call. But the latest batches of results released on Wednesday and Thursday, which included data from many satellite caucuses, helped Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont close the gap with former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., who is leading. As of Thursday night, Mr. Buttigieg had 564 state delegate equivalents, or S.D.E.s; Mr. Sanders had 562.
In a race that tight, every delegate matters. And with the party assigning more than 40 S.D.E.s to the satellite caucuses, who won them, and by how much, could help determine the Iowa winner.
A New York Times analysis of the state party’s tabulated results shows that Mr. Sanders won the satellite caucuses that have reported by a wide margin. He has picked up 25.5 S.D.E.s from satellite caucuses so far, by the party’s accounting; Mr. Buttigieg got only 1.2. That difference is far greater than the margin between the two men in any of Iowa’s 99 counties.
Those numbers could change, especially if the results are recanvassed, as Tom Perez, the Democratic National Committee chairman, called for on Thursday. Questions have also been raised about the formula the state party is using to award S.D.E.s to the satellite precincts.
But what are these satellite caucuses, and how did they give Mr. Sanders such an advantage? Here’s a primer.
Caucuses have a number of features that differentiate them from a primary. Of course, there are the odd mechanics of how they are actually conducted once a person arrives (which you can see in action here). But there are also logistical issues that critics say make it much harder for people to participate at all.
For one, the regular caucuses begin at a single set time — in Iowa, 7 p.m. — rather than throughout the day. That can make them difficult to attend for people who work or go to school at night or who care for young children. And the events can drag on for hours, much of that time spent standing in a corner of a gym or other uncomfortable location. Attending a caucus can prove taxing for many people and nearly impossible for people with disabilities.
Then there are the people away from home to consider, and caucusgoers who speak a language other than English. The list of accessibility challenges helps explain why in Iowa, a state of more than three million people, the largest number to participate in a Democratic caucus — at least as of Monday — was about 240,000 in 2008.
Aware of these longstanding concerns, Democratic National Committee members voted in 2018 to encourage states that held caucuses to switch to primaries, and to require the caucus states that remained — like Iowa and Nevada — to find another way for people to participate.
In Iowa, Democrats spent months trying to design a “virtual” caucus system, which would have allowed participation through a phone call, but the Democratic National Committee rejected that proposal over security concerns. They also considered mailing absentee paper ballots, but ditched that idea because of fears that it hemmed to close to being a primary.
In the end, they landed on satellite caucuses, which went into action on Monday.
To host a satellite caucus, people unable to attend their regular precinct caucus were required to apply, and a state party panel approved each of the gathering locations. The Iowa Democratic Party initially announced a list of 99 satellite caucuses, but later nixed 12 of them, leaving a total of 87 sites.
The locations were variously meant to accommodate students, workers, older people, people with disabilities, people who speak a language other than English, people wintering in another state and people living abroad. Any registered Iowa Democrat was allowed to participate. Sixty of the 87 sites were in Iowa; the rest were elsewhere in the country and at three overseas locations.
Party officials set up a formula to determine how many state delegate equivalents were allotted to the satellite caucuses, based on turnout at the events (more on that below). The party said more than 1,700 people had registered for a satellite caucus, though more may have shown up on Monday. Of those who registered, officials said a significant majority were out of state or at an international site.
The Sanders team appeared to make the most concerted effort among the Democratic campaigns to capitalize on the new caucus format.
It employed an organizing director specifically for the satellite caucuses. And it pushed for them to be held at universities, hoping to increase turnout from the young voters who power Mr. Sanders’s base of support.
The Sanders campaign was also intently focused on winning the Latino vote in the state, and appeared to be the only one with precinct captains designated for Spanish-language caucuses. A Sanders campaign adviser said that of the 483 people who attended Spanish satellite caucuses, 430 went for Mr. Sanders.
The party’s published results show how Mr. Sanders was able to dominate at many of the satellite locations. At one caucus held at the Better Day Cafe in Storm Lake, Mr. Sanders was supported by 93 of the 103 participants and picked up 2.98 S.D.E.s — the largest delegate haul for any candidate from any precinct in the state.
But Mr. Sanders may also be benefiting from the way the state party is allocating S.D.E.s to the satellite caucuses. Close watchers of the results have raised questions about which formula the party is using; under other interpretations of the rules, the satellite caucuses would not be quite as valuable to Mr. Sanders in the S.D.E. count.
And that, too, could make all the difference in a race now separated by the thinnest of margins.