8 Things to Do With Your Kids in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
AKC MEET THE BREEDS at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center (Jan. 25-26, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.). When was the last time your children had a close encounter with a pumi, a vizsla or a cirneco dell’Etna? (While watching “Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker” is not the right answer.) As alien as the names sound, these creatures are actually domestic dogs, among the more than 100 varieties that families can investigate — along with cats — at this weekend extravaganza. Presented by the American Kennel Club and the International Cat Association, this annual event exhibits friendly pets in booths decorated to reflect each breed’s character and history. Although the furry pals are not adoptable, children are encouraged to pet and play with them. The exhibition will also offer an indoor puppy park; a shopping mart; demonstrations of canine agility, search skills, obedience, tricks and law-enforcement training; and performances by the Savitsky Cats, known for their acrobatic feats on “America’s Got Talent” in 2018.
akc.org
BROADWAY PLAYHOUSE: CHARLES STROUSE at Merkin Hall (Jan. 26, 11 a.m.). Daddy Warbucks may have been Little Orphan Annie’s protector, but the composer Charles Strouse helped make her a star of the stage. Children can learn all about his career in this season-opening edition of Broadway Playhouse, the Kaufman Music Center series that introduces theatergoers ages 4 to 11 to the creators of classic American shows. In addition to offering a mini-version of the musical “Annie” and songs from “Bye Bye Birdie” and other works, the writer and host Sean Hartley and his cast will invite young audience members to get in on the act. The fun will include singing along to the tunes and even going onstage to play a game titled after the song “It’s the Hard Knock Life.”
212-501-3330, kaufmanmusiccenter.org
‘CHARLOTTE’S WEB’ at the Leon M. Goldstein Performing Arts Center (Jan. 26, 2 p.m.). In this classic for children, the life of Wilbur, the amiable pig on the Zuckerman farm, hangs by a thread — the one spun by the unusual eight-legged heroine. First appearing in E. B. White’s poignant 1952 novel, notable for its tender but frank treatment of love and loss, these characters are now in a revival of Joseph Robinette’s theatrical adaptation, which is being presented as part of the series On Stage at Kingsborough in Brooklyn. Unlike many of the shows produced by TheaterWorksUSA, “Charlotte’s Web” is not a musical, though it does feature some bluegrass accompaniment as it relates how this inventive spider saves Wilbur from the slaughterhouse by extolling his virtues in the words she weaves in the barn.
718-368-5596, onstageatkingsborough.org
‘DOG MAN: THE MUSICAL’ at Queens Theater (Jan. 25, 1 and 3 p.m.; Jan. 26, 1, 3 and 6 p.m.). Don’t expect howls to come only from this show’s half-canine hero. Based on Dav Pilkey’s irreverent graphic-novel series — especially the book “Dog Man: A Tale of Two Kitties” — this adaptation from TheaterWorksUSA has enough zany humor to crack up anyone who’s 100 percent human. In a plot that manages to mash up “RoboCop” and Charles Dickens, the interspecies police officer Dog Man (the result of some emergency surgery) battles the evil machinations of both a bionic fish and a conniving cat. Written by Kevin Del Aguila and Brad Alexander, the musical uses the same conceit as each of the novels in the series: that it is really the creation of a pair of fifth-grade boys.
718-760-0064, queenstheatre.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
‘HERE WE GO!’ at the Kaye Playhouse (Jan. 26, 2 p.m.). Sometimes you’d swear that inanimate objects have their own personalities. This is never more true than at a show by the Paper Bag Players, the endlessly imaginative theatrical troupe that specializes in giving vivid life to the simple and ordinary. Transforming cardboard and paper into houses, landscapes, galaxies and even people (Jonathan Peck is the scenic artist), the company has created another rollicking musical revue in “Here We Go!” Its intended audience, children 3 to 8, will delight in characters like an apprehensive bowling pin, a recalcitrant chair — just try to sit on it — and three trees that are determined to outwit a woodcutter. Classic sketches from the players’ history appear alongside new material by Ted Brackett, John Stone and Kevin Richard Woodall. Their skits include “Zymillaquixar,” named for a distant planet whose welcoming alien, Snerp, is at least as endearing as E.T.
212-772-4448, thepaperbagplayers.org
MIL’S TRILLS 10TH ANNIVERSARY WINTER BASH at ShapeShifter Lab (Jan. 26, 10:30 a.m.-noon). Composing a tune is more than being creative with notes; it also involves facing challenges. Amelia Robinson, a.k.a. Mil, who is known for her children’s music and her electric ukulele, will demonstrate the process — and immerse young listeners in it — at this celebratory show in Brooklyn. The morning will begin with a crafts workshop to make concert props, including colorful eyeglasses that represent each person’s worldview. Then Robinson, who will be joined by guest musicians, will lead the crowd through what she calls her songwriting obstacle course, an exercise of imagination in which children help improvise melodies. Geared toward music fans 12 and under, the event will include sharing stories, devising sounds, experimenting with movement and making decisions about rhythm and tempo.
646-820-9452, milstrills.com
‘REVOLUTIONARY WOMEN’ at the Fraunces Tavern Museum (Jan. 25, 2 p.m.). Women weren’t always behind the scenes during the war for American independence. A few, like Deborah Samson (also spelled Sampson), made it to the front lines by disguising themselves as men. Darci Tucker, a teaching artist, will portray Samson and another real figure — Elizabeth Thompson, a loyalist spy — in this solo show. Tucker, who wrote the script, will also play Jane Walker, a fictitious character who represents all the women who did support work for the Continental Army. In addition to meeting these three in the interactive performance, families who buy tickets can take part in a 1 p.m. Women of the Revolutionary War Tour — space is limited and registration required — of this Lower Manhattan museum, which had its own role in the conflict.
212-425-1778, frauncestavernmuseum.org
‘SHOW UP, KIDS!’ at the Kraine Theater (Jan. 25-26, 11:30 a.m.; through Feb. 9). This production’s title is ever so slightly misleading. Here, kids don’t just show up; they invent the setting and plot, create the characters, supervise the costumes and props and generally direct Peter Michael Marino’s hourlong solo presentation. Marino, who performed this improvisational comedy at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe and then in New York last year, has returned to the East Village to entertain aspiring young theatrical professionals with his premise: The main attraction is a no-show. That means that he has to take over — or, rather, they do.
showuptheshow.com