Impeachment, Germany, Huawei: Your Friday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
As the U.S. Senate formally opened President Trump’s impeachment trial on Thursday, Ukraine said it had begun a criminal investigation into allies of Mr. Trump who might have put an American diplomat under surveillance while she was the ambassador to Kyiv.
The investigation is an unusually bold move for Ukraine’s government, which has tried to stay out of the impeachment debate and needs Washington’s help in its conflict with Russia.
It centers on text messages that suggest Robert Hyde, an obscure Republican candidate for Congress, secretly tracked the movements of the diplomat, Marie Yovanovitch, whom Mr. Trump later removed from Ukraine.
Background: Lev Parnas, the Soviet-born businessman who exchanged the messages with Mr. Hyde, turned them over to congressional Democrats scrutinizing Mr. Trump’s campaign to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rivals. Mr. Parnas had worked with Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudolph Giuliani, to oust Ms. Yovanovitch, whom the president’s allies considered an impediment.
Responses: In separate television interviews on Wednesday, Mr. Parnas said he had not taken Mr. Hyde seriously, and Mr. Hyde said the messages were “colorful texts” in which he was “joking around.”
Related: A nonpartisan U.S. government watchdog said the Trump administration had violated American law by withholding nearly $400 million in congressionally allocated security aid to Ukraine — a decision at the heart of the impeachment case.
All our coverage: No photos or videos are allowed in the Senate chamber, the venue for President Trump’s impeachment trial. So we sent a sketch artist.
Russia’s Parliament on Thursday overwhelmingly approved a little-known technocrat, Mikhail Mishustin, as President Vladimir Putin’s handpicked prime minister.
The vote came a day after Mr. Putin shook up Russia’s political order, which had largely been unchanged since the early 1990s, by proposing major constitutional changes that would shift power from the presidency to Parliament and other institutions.
Parliament is seen as a rubber-stamp body, and this week’s rapid-fire developments could indicate that Mr. Putin, 67, plans to take a new position that would allow him to retain his grip on power. He has already been in power for 20 years, longer than any Russian leader since Stalin.
Looking ahead: Wednesday’s shake-up prompted Dmitri Medvedev, Mr. Putin’s long-serving ally, to abruptly resign the premiership. He will become deputy chairman of Russia’s Security Council, which advises the president.
Should Germany allow the Chinese company Huawei to help build its 5G next-generation mobile network? Berlin’s decision will shape its relations with China for years and signal how Europe views Washington’s digital rivalry with Beijing.
Saying yes could expose German automakers to potential tariffs from the U.S., which has blocked Huawei and believes China is using the company for espionage.
But China has become the biggest source of growth for Germany’s main carmakers. And because some of them are already working closely with Huawei, our correspondents write, “it may be China who sits in the driver’s seat.”
What’s next: Germany’s Parliament is expected to keep debating the Huawei matter in the coming weeks. Chancellor Angela Merkel opposes shutting the company out, but some in Germany’s foreign policy and intelligence community, who are worried about American threats to limit intelligence-sharing, may submit a proposal to effectively do just that.
Yesterday: Germany said, without elaborating, that it had raided the homes and offices of three people suspected of spying for China.
Catch up: We looked last month at how Huawei lays on the charm in Brussels.
Max Czollek, above, is one of about 200,000 Jews who live in Germany. Most of them migrated there from the former Soviet Union after the fall of the Berlin Wall, but his grandfather was a Holocaust survivor who returned to East Germany in the late 1940s from exile in China.
Mr. Czollek, 32, is now an expert on anti-Semitism, and his 2018 book, “Desintegriert Euch” (“De-integrate Yourselves”), has been making waves in the country. It argues that Germany, eager to shed its Nazi past, isn’t reckoning with the rise of anti-Semitism, xenophobia and racism.
Quitting coal: Germany said that it would wean itself off the fossil fuel by 2038, at a cost of $44.5 billion. Environmental organizations said that timeline was too slow.
$1,000,000,000,000: The market capitalization of Google’s parent entity, Alphabet, surpassed $1 trillion for the first time, vaulting the company into a club that includes Apple, Amazon and Microsoft.
Wealth and longevity: A study by researchers in Britain and the U.S. found that wealthy people get eight to nine more “disability-free” years after 50 than the poorest individuals in those countries.
Controversial mustache: The facial hair of the American ambassador to Seoul reminds many South Koreans of their country’s colonial period, in which Japanese governors-general ​wore mustaches​.
Snapshot: Above, Medd Cafe in Jeddah, a coffee shop in Saudi Arabia where men and women can mingle. The government relaxed gender-segregation rules in December, but not everyone is happy.
In memoriam: Lorenza Mazzetti, 92, who survived the killings of her caretaker family during World War II, wrote a prizewinning novel and helped create Britain’s Free Cinema movement.
What we’re listening to: This podcast episode from “Song Exploder,” about the ’90s song “Closing Time” by Semisonic. “You may have listened to this at the end of a night out as the bar lights started to flicker,” writes Remy Tumin, of the Briefings team, “but the back story will make you hear it in a whole new way.”
Cook: Spend some time this weekend making the ultimate comfort food: classic lasagna.
Read: Our critic says “A Very Stable Genius,” by the Washington Post reporters Philip Rucker and Carol Leonnig, is “among the most closely observed accounts of Donald J. Trump’s shambolic tenure in office to date.”
Go: “Kharmohra: Art Under Fire in Afghanistan,” a show featuring work by 11 Afghan artists, runs at the Mucem museum in Marseille through March 1.
Smarter Living: Here’s how to turn social media platforms into positive (or, at worst, neutral) aspects of your life.
At least six passengers on a bus in Xining, China, died this week when the pavement collapsed under it.
Sinkholes, both natural and human-caused, are rare and rarely deadly. But they fascinate us because they seem to appear out of nowhere, and in unusual places.
A sinkhole opened up in 2013 under a home in Florida — where much of the ground base is limestone, a soluble rock — killing a man in his bedroom. Another, in 2014, swallowed eight cars at the National Corvette Museum in Kentucky. A sinkhole engulfed an entire building complex in Shenzhen, China, in 2013.
Natural sinkholes occur when underground water has insufficient drainage and begins to corrode the rock under the top layer of soil. Human causes include leaking or crumbling underground water pipes.
The damage gradually takes place under the surface, but when the layer at the top can no longer support itself, it can suddenly and violently give way.