Chance Perdomo Plays a Pansexual Warlock on ‘Sabrina’
Name: Chance Perdomo
Age: 23
Hometown: Born in Los Angeles and raised in Southampton, England.
Now lives: When he is not shooting (he is currently filming in Vancouver, British Columbia), he lives with his family in a “small and quaint” home in Southampton.
Claim to fame: Mr. Perdomo is an actor who describes himself as “a black child raised by a Latino mother in a white society with two nationalities.” In Britain, he is best known for starring in “Killed by My Debt,” a TV film based on the true story of a young courier who killed himself when two traffic tickets grew into a soul-crushing debt.
In the United States, he is known for playing a pansexual warlock on “Chilling Adventures of Sabrina,” a Gen Z spin on the Sabrina the Teenage Witch universe.
Big break: After graduating from Peter Symonds College in Winchester, where one of his majors was theater, he landed a small part on an episode of “Hetty Feather,” a British children’s drama set in the Victorian era. It was “one or two lines,” Mr. Perdomo said, but it was enough “to take that leap of faith” and pursue acting full time.
Latest project: Last year, he was nominated for a BAFTA award for his role in “Killed by My Debt” (he lost out to Benedict Cumberbatch). Variety recently named him one of the “10 Brits to watch for 2020.”
Next thing: The third season of “Sabrina” will be released on Netflix this month. Beyond the show’s spooky cloaks and daggers, he hopes new episodes will allow viewers to continue probing the sexually fluid sorcerer he plays onscreen.
“I wasn’t too familiar with the intricacies of pansexuality,” he said. “It’s just one aspect of someone’s identity, so I decided to play the character the exact same way I would any other.”
Being flashy: Mr. Perdomo is a disciple of parkour, which comes in handy for the occasional back flip on set. “You’re climbing around urban environments and basically trying to find the most efficient, almost flashiest way to get from Point A to Point B irrespective of any obstacles in the way,” he said. “I’ve been higher than a human being probably should.”