Suspected Coronavirus Case in New York Is Ruled Out
A woman hospitalized in New York City amid concerns that she could have the new coronavirus has tested negative, city health officials said on Tuesday.
The woman, who had been at Bellevue Medical Center since Friday night, was one of three patients recently hospitalized in the city who doctors thought might have the virus, which emerged in China late last year before spreading to at least two dozen countries.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported the negative results for the woman’s samples to city authorities on Tuesday, officials said. Samples from the other two patients who may have the virus have been sent to the C.D.C., and the results are pending, officials said.
“We’re relieved to hear that the person in question does not have the novel coronavirus,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a statement. “I can’t say this enough: If you have the symptoms and recent travel history, please see your health provider immediately.”
There has yet to be a confirmed case of the new illness in New York City or anywhere in New York State.
As of Monday, 11 people in the United States had been found to have the illness, according to the C.D.C. Of the 11, the only patient on the East Coast to have tested positive was in Massachusetts.
The new virus is believed to have originated in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year before spreading widely. The Chinese government has reported 20,438 confirmed cases, and the death toll in China had passed 420 deaths as of Tuesday.
For now, local authorities in the United States cannot test for the virus and must send samples to the C.D.C. in Atlanta. It can take several days to get results.
New York City officials have said that the three patients whose samples were sent to the C.D.C. had all traveled recently from China; had a fever and cough or shortness of breath; and had tested negative for influenza and a number of other common illnesses.
The woman who tested negative for the new coronavirus is said to be under 40. She was visiting New York and began to feel ill about two days after arriving in the United States. An ambulance brought her from the hotel where she was staying to Bellevue, the flagship of the city’s public hospital system, late on Friday.
“The response and care the patient received reflects how well the systems we have in place are working,” said Dr. Oxiris Barbot, the city’s health commissioner.
The two other patients whose samples were sent to the C.D.C. have been described as over 60. Both were hospitalized last weekend in Flushing, Queens.
The authorities in New York have said they are ready for the illness, and that sooner or later it is bound to arrive.
“Whatever happens internationally, it winds up at our doorstep relatively quickly,” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, said at a news conference on Sunday.
Coronaviruses have been behind other dangerous outbreaks in recent decades: SARS in 2003 and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS, which was first reported in 2012.
The new coronavirus appears to be less lethal than SARS or MERS, but it is spreading more quickly. Symptoms can include fever, cough and shortness of breath, according to the C.D.C. While the illness is mild in some patients, others have pneumonia and respiratory failure.