Review: ‘Cartography’ Hops Around a Fractured World Map
It is hard to find an anchor in “Cartography.” Kaneza Schaal and Christopher Myers’s documentary show, at the New Victory Theater, does not have a linear structure, presenting its stories for young audiences in interweaving fragments and hopscotching around countries and timelines. The set itself is made up of cardboard boxes that keep being rearranged — they form a back wall onto which images are projected, and it later tumbles down.
The show’s title refers to the study and drawing of maps, but even those keep changing. “I know my passport has expired,” a migrant played by Malaika Uwamahoro says. “So has my country.”
This sense of constant flux is a thoughtful representation of the impermanence that weighs on refugees, the people at the show’s heart. Four of them are gathered in a room, waiting to fill out the forms and answer the questions that will move them, maybe, one step closer to a new home. They are fairly patient and good humored, considering. After all, this is just one more obstacle on a course that must feel close to endless.
Portrayed by Uwamahoro, Janice Amaya, Noor Hamdi and Victoria Nassif, these forced nomads tell us, and each other, what has brought them to this room. They have left behind families and friends; the journeys have been arduous. At one point, they take turns inflating a boat with a hand pump. It takes quite a while, and the result looks terrifyingly flimsy for use on rough seas.
You may think you know where the show is going when that raft appears, especially since much of the discourse around migration tends to focus on heart-wrenching tales of separation and hardship.
But “Cartography” takes another tack. In a recent interview with The Times, Myers (the show’s co-creator and designer) recounted how a Malian boy evoked childhood sounds that involved machine guns but managed to avoid “the pornography of horror or the lurid fascination with tragedy.” You can tell this is exactly what he and Schaal (co-creator and director) tried to avoid here, opting instead for a hopeful approach that focuses on resilience and on how roots can endure even after they have been pulled out.
Yet the show can also be strangely uninvolving. Despite the actors’ warmth and skill, memories and anecdotes follow each other without lending much individuality to the people behind them. “If they want to know us, they need a lot more space on these forms,” Uwamahoro’s character says in the waiting room, and you wish the show itself ventured behind its self-imposed grid of … niceness? Optimism?
And then the cast members break the fourth wall and speak as themselves, introducing us to their own stories. Suddenly there is a jolt of energy, even if our curiosity is aroused as much by what’s said as by what’s not — in the program, for instance, Hamdi mentions performing at the Criminal Queerness Festival, and you might wonder how his Syrian family reacted.
The actors eventually invited audience members to pull out their phones and enter their journeys onto a map projected onstage, which kept changing as more people contributed their information. It was thrilling to simply see the many trajectories that brought a bunch of strangers together at a matinee on West 42nd Street.