Corrections: Jan. 5, 2020
An article on Page 8 about an apprentice program for young adults recovering from substance abuse run by luthiers from the Appalachian Artisan Center in Kentucky misspells the name of Kentucky’s capital. It is Frankfort, not Frankfurt.
An article on Page 3 about the director and writer Simon Stone misstated the relationship of the actors Bobby Cannavale and Rose Byrne. They are partners, but they are not married.
An article last Sunday about culinary podcasts included outdated information about the producer of one podcast, “The Sporkful.” It is now part of Stitcher, not WNYC.
An article last Sunday about Réunion Island misstated the year that it became an overseas department of France. It was 1946, not 1960.
The 36 Hours article last Sunday, about Recife, Brazil, and the nearby area, misstated the local results of the last presidential election. Fernando Haddad won in Recife, not Jair Bolsonaro, who was elected.
The Q. and A. article on Dec. 22, about Brian Orter, a lighting designer, misspelled part of the name of a design firm that worked on the Ace hotel. It is Roman and Williams, not Romand and Williams.
A map with the Living In article last Sunday, about Midtown South, misidentified an avenue shown on the east side of Manhattan. It is Park Avenue, not Park Avenue South.
An interview on Page 13 with the actress Lily Tomlin misstates the season of “Grace and Frankie” that begins streaming this month. It is the sixth season, not the seventh. The article also misstates the year of her one-woman show, “The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe.” The original stage show premiered in 1985, not 1991. The film adaptation was released in 1991.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.