An Attack by Iran, Then an Easing of Tensions
To the Editor:
Re “Trump Backs Away From Further Military Conflict With Iran” (nytimes.com, Jan. 8):
Iran could have reacted two ways to the assassination of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani. It could have bombed the hell out of us, killing hundreds of Americans. That would have forced America to respond in kind, and the end result would have been the feared war that nobody wanted. Or the Iranians could phone in a warning and then lob a bunch of low-rent missiles into an unoccupied part of two Iraqi bases. Obviously, that’s the option it chose.
The president killed General Suleimani for two reasons: because President Barack Obama wouldn’t, and because he knew it would take the emphasis off his impeachment trial and bolster his ratings with his followers. The schoolyard bully poked and prodded a hostile enemy until it responded, then made up a story about pending terrorist attacks and his awesome response to the threat.
As a former military member, I cried when I heard about the attacks on our bases. I thought of all those young American men and women who were going to die in the name of Donald Trump’s maniacal bravado. Then I realized that Iran didn’t target the Americans; it targeted Mr. Trump’s ego. And in the process both sides got what they wanted.
Iran won’t get an ill-fated U.S. attack on its critical infrastructure. Mr. Trump hopes this boosts his chances of getting re-elected by followers who honestly think he saved us from Iranian terrorism.
Jeffery Donaldson
Las Vegas
To the Editor:
I am thankful that at least for now, President Trump seems to be backing off from engaging in further provocation of our implacable foe, Iran. Obviously, some reasonable individual has gotten through to him that to continue the dangerous game of tit for tat could be ruinous to our country and our allies.
Mr. Trump’s incompetence and impetuousness brought about the assassination of one of the most revered and powerful individuals in Iran. The world has been ridden of an evil and bloodthirsty man, but at what cost? It would be reasonable to expect that Iran and its network of proxies would respond with vengeance, and we have seen the outrage of millions of its people in the streets since the killing.
If we are able to emerge from this with no loss of life or limb by our soldiers and civilians, which seems to be the case as I write this, we should consider ourselves lucky. Let us hope that this is not simply the calm before the storm.
Oren Spiegler
Peters Township, Pa.
To the Editor:
“Long Before President’s Drone Strike, Iran Hawks Pushed for the Killing of a General” (news article, Jan. 7) is spot on. The assassination of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani was utterly brilliant, in conception and in execution. General Suleimani had the blood of numerous victims on his hands.
I’m appalled that the Democrats can’t see that the swing voters whom they need in order to beat President Trump won’t respond well to criticism of the assassination. They are so full of disdain for Mr. Trump that they are helping him to be re-elected rather than agree with anything he does.
Those of us who really dislike Mr. Trump should check if we are forming our opinion of General Suleimani’s killing because of our antipathy for the president. If Barack Obama had authorized the killing of General Suleimani, as he did for Osama bin Laden, what would we say?
Gilad Stern
Cape Town
To the Editor:
Re “The Day After War Begins in Iran,” by Azadeh Moaveni (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Jan. 6):
I thank Ms. Moaveni for her thoughtful perspective and insights. I’m of the generation that had the privilege to attend an American university during the 1960s along with quite a few Iranian students, and to work weekends at a restaurant with several of them who, like me, needed a bit of income to keep body and soul together.
They were wonderful young people, and that very positive experience is a vivid memory. It stimulated a lifelong interest in Iran and its peoples. Now, in my declining years, and with these recent events, I am saddened to realize that I am unlikely to ever be able to visit their country and learn more about their culture.
Could our two countries do what is needed to heal our differences and return to a state of mutual respect and appreciation? I sincerely hope so.
John R. Martin
Sarasota, Fla.