How Victory in the Cold War Led to Tragedy in the Years After
THE AGE OF ILLUSIONS
How America Squandered Its Cold War Victory
By Andrew J. Bacevich
Andrew J. Bacevich, a trenchant critic of American foreign policy and the author of several studies of international affairs, begins his latest book, “The Age of Illusions,” with a quote from Harry Angstrom, the protagonist of John Updike’s “Rabbit” novels. “Without the Cold War,” Angstrom asked, “what’s the point of being an American?”
It’s a funny question. America is a young country, but the Cold War is a late episode even in our short history. From Ben Franklin to Langston Hughes, Americans have articulated our distinctiveness in ways that did not implicitly culminate in a twilight struggle with Communism. But the central argument of Bacevich’s book is that, for America’s major institutions, its ruling class and the intelligentsia that serves them both, Angstrom’s question was deeply threatening. Too much was riding, psychologically and financially, on the economic policies, military posture and cultural orientation that had outmatched the Soviet Union. As a consequence, when that pole star suddenly winked out, we didn’t consider changing course. We opened the throttle and surged forward in the dark, guided by the illusory stars in our eyes.
Three major illusions led us. First, capitalism’s victory over Communism meant that the more unbounded capital was, through freer trade and more open capital markets, the better off Americans — and the world — would be. Second, as America’s military superiority was now overwhelming, we had the right, the ability and the obligation to dictate the terms of global peace, and to enforce that peace by making war. Finally, as freedom had proved itself superior to tyranny, Americans no longer had any reason to accept limits on their autonomy, or any reason to worry that other nations might take a different view of freedom than we did. Guided by these illusions, we drove our ship of state straight onto the rocks: We dismantled our industrial base, mired ourselves in unwinnable wars and tore apart the social fabric that bound city to country, worker to employer and soldier to civilian.
It’s a compelling narrative, and one congruent with the story of “American carnage” that brought Donald Trump to the White House. Aware of that fact, Bacevich is at pains to stress his disgust at the current president, whom he views as a demagogue capitalizing on the failure of these illusions rather than offering any kind of helpful response. In the course of breezily narrating the deficiencies of the past four presidencies, he breaks periodically to remind the reader what an unedifying spectacle Trump was making of himself at each point in time, and how that spectacle exemplified something ugly about the America aborning.
Yet Bacevich’s narrative is also congruent with older critics of America’s way of life and its way in the world. Readers of Thorstein Veblen, William Appleman Williams or Christopher Lasch, of which Bacevich is one, would hardly be surprised by the choices America’s elites made after the Soviet Union collapsed. And if our national illusions go deeper than one generation, Bacevich’s argument becomes an indictment not just of how America handled the post-Cold War period, but also of what America had already come to be by the time the Cold War ended, or even was at its start.
This indictment is ultimately a spiritual one: of obsessive consumption, and freedom defined as escape from restraint rather than self-mastery. Aware of America’s need for a great moral mission, Bacevich calls on us to turn that impulse toward fighting climate change, a profound and real threat rather than an illusion. Still, while there are deep American roots for such a call, they constitute a countercultural tradition that stands against what the United States has most readily represented. If America neglected to look inward after the end of the Cold War, as Bacevich wishes we had done, is that a reflection of its failures, or of the natural temptations of our position? History records few if any emperors who willingly set aside power’s poisoned chalice.
Meanwhile, though Bacevich doubts whether America’s distinctive illusions actually won the Cold War, I wonder whether Mikhail Gorbachev would agree. Would he have been so willing to withdraw peacefully and see his own empire dismantled if he had not, to some degree, taken our professed beliefs at face value? If so, then our case is classically tragic. The very illusions that brought us victory are what powered our subsequent hubris, and nemesis rose from the inevitable disillusion of a world that trusted us in our folly.