7 Comedy Shows to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
ASIAN COMEDY FESTIVAL at the Peoples Improv Theater (Jan. 25, 5 p.m.-midnight; Jan. 26, 3-11 p.m.). For the PIT’s first event in a planned annual celebration of Asian and Asian-American comedians, it has scheduled acts from around the world. Local comedians on the bill include Karen Chee, a writer and performer on “Late Night With Seth Meyers,” who is regularly quizzed by her boss in a segment called “What Does Karen Know.” Other performances feature sketch and improv teams, a live podcast and stand-ups such as Jes Tom, Bryan Yang and Usama Siddiquee.
212-563-7488, thepit-nyc.com
BROOKLYN PODCAST FESTIVAL at various locations (through Jan. 26). The third edition of this series is nearly halfway over, but it still offers 12 tapings for podcast enthusiasts to savor from Friday through Sunday. The pick of that litter includes “Great Moments in Weed History” with Ben Sinclair, star and co-creator of “High Maintenance,” as a special guest (Friday, 10 p.m., the Bell House); “Secret Keepers Club,” hosted by Carly Aquilino and Emma Willmann (Saturday, 7:30 p.m., the Bell House); “The Unofficial Expert” with Marie Faustin, Sydnee Washington and their guests (Saturday, 7:30 p.m., Union Hall); and “Dr. Gameshow,” in which Jo Firestone and Manolo Moreno challenge their audience with games generated by their listeners (Sunday, 7:30 p.m., Union Hall).
cityfarmpresents.com/bkpodfest
‘DEBATE CLUB’ at Caveat (Jan. 27-28, 9:30 p.m.). National Lampoon presents this new series hosted by Jordan Klepper (“The Daily Show With Trevor Noah,” “The Opposition With Jordan Klepper”), in which he moderates amusingly educational arguments about serious matters. At Monday’s show, the comedians Kenice Mobley and Michael Cruz Kayne will discuss reparations with Coleman Hughes, a philosophy student at Columbia University whose work has appeared in publications such as The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, and Nelini Stamp, the national organizing director for the Working Families Party. The question for Tuesday’s debate will be “Should we forgive student loan debt?”
212-228-2100, caveat.nyc
8TH ANNUAL PATRICE O’NEAL COMEDY BENEFIT at New York City Center (Jan. 27, 7 p.m.). Bill Burr started his comedy career in Boston in the early 1990s at the same time as O’Neal, and has organized a benefit each year in O’Neal’s honor since his death in 2011 at the age of 41. Joining Burr this time around are Ronny Chieng, Roy Wood Jr., Judy Gold, Sam Morril, Andrew Schulz, Cipha Sounds, Paul Virzi and Rich Vos. Ticket availability to the event is limited.
212-581-1212, nycitycenter.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
HARI KONDABOLU at Carolines on Broadway (Jan. 23, 7 p.m.; Jan. 24-25, 7 and 9:30 p.m.). This stand-up, a Queens native, wrote and starred in a 2017 documentary for TruTV, “The Problem With Apu,” which explores how that animated character’s thick-accented stereotypical depiction on “The Simpsons” impacted young Americans of South Asian descent. (Just last week, the actor Hank Azaria announced he would stop voicing the character.) Kondabolu’s satire has plenty of bite: He offered several shrewd observations about our nation’s racial politics, with a healthy dose of self-awareness, in his 2018 Netflix comedy special, “Warn Your Relatives.”
212-757-4100, carolines.com
DREW MICHAEL at Littlefield (Jan. 24, 8 p.m.). A former writer for “Saturday Night Live,” this stand-up released an unorthodox special on HBO in 2018, in which he performed his routine as a monologue, mostly straight to camera and without a live audience. For this showcase, though, you’re more than welcome to watch Michael share what he has got on his mind these days.
littlefieldnyc.com
‘SIDESHOW GOSHKO’ at KGB Bar (Jan. 30, 7 p.m.). Leslie Goshko will celebrate the 11th anniversary of her storytelling showcase with tales from Kevin Allison, Andy Christie and Katina Corrao. To sweeten the deal, 11 audience members (one for each anniversary) will win a free bottle of wine.
212-505-3360, kgbbar.com