Michelle Williams Tells Women to Vote for Their Rights at Golden Globes
While the Golden Globes are a celebration of the year’s best in film and television, the show has for years been used as a platform to raise awareness of more somber issues.
On Sunday, some winners took advantage of the spotlight to speak out about some of today’s most pressing and divisive matters.
Michelle Williams, accepting best actress in a limited series or TV movie for “Fosse/Verdon,” implored women to vote for their interests, speaking personally about the importance of women’s rights and reproductive freedom. Last week, more than 200 Republicans urged the Supreme Court to weigh overturning Roe v. Wade.
“As women and as girls, things can happen to our bodies that are not our choice,” she said, adding how fortunate she has been to mostly have control over the events of her life. “I wouldn’t have been able to do this without employing a woman’s right to choose — to choose when to have my children and with whom,” she said, acknowledging that not every woman’s choice looks the same but that we’re tied by the country’s founding principle of freedom.
“Women, 18 to 118, when it is time to vote, please do so in your own self-interest,” she went on. “It’s what men have been doing for years, which is why the world looks so much like them.”
Earlier in the night, Patricia Arquette, accepting an award for her role in “The Act,” addressed the fires ravaging Australia, as well as President Trump’s targeted killing of Iran’s most powerful commander, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani last week and the consequences of the attack.
When we look back on this night, Arquette said, “we will see a country on the brink of war, the United States of America, a president tweeting out a threat of 52 bombs including cultural sites.” On Sunday, President Trump tweeted about destroying Iranian cultural sites.
“Young people risking their lives, traveling across the world, people not knowing if bombs are going to drop on their kids’ heads, and the continent of Australia on fire,” she said. “So while I love my kids so much, I beg of us all to give them a better world.”
She wasn’t the first to bring up the dire situation in Australia. Early on, Russell Crowe won best actor in a limited series for  “The Loudest Voice.” But he wasn’t there to accept: He opted to remain at his home in Australia out of concern for the fires. Instead, he sent a message that was read on his behalf by Jennifer Aniston.
“Make no mistake, the tragedy unfolding in Australia is climate-change-based,” he wrote. “We need to act based on science, move our global work force to renewable energy and respect our planet for the unique and amazing place it is. That way we all have a future.”
Later, Ellen DeGeneres, accepting the Carol Burnett Award for lifetime achievement, began by saying: “Australia, I love you; my heart goes out to everyone who is suffering in Australia, all the animals that we’ve lost.”
And winning one of the final awards of the night, best actor in a drama for his twisted turn in “Joker,” Joaquin Phoenix said he didn’t want to rock the boat, but that the boat had already been rocked.
“It’s really nice that so many people have sent their well wishes to Australia but we have to do more than that,” Phoenix said. “Hopefully, we can be unified and actually make some changes. It’s great to vote, but sometimes we have to take that responsibility on ourselves and make changes and sacrifices in our own lives,” he said. “We don’t have to take private jets to Palm Springs for the awards.”
In past years, Globes winners and presenters took a more united approach to issues.
In 2018, Globes attendees exhibited solidarity with the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements, with nearly every guest dressed in black, creating a “blackout.” Many winners — including Elisabeth Moss, Laura Dern and Frances McDormand — used their acceptance speeches to address sexism and the importance of speaking truth to power. The show took places just a few months after the movie mogul Harvey Weinstein was accused of sexual misconduct in reports by The New York Times and The New Yorker. (On Monday, Weinstein’s criminal trial, involving charges of sexual assault, will begin. He has pleaded not guilty. )
At last year’s ceremony, the discussion of workplace sexual harassment was dialed back considerably but still mentioned in acceptance speeches — Regina King  stopped the play-off music with the words “Time’s Up times two.” And many stars donned black-and-white bracelets and ribbons that read “#TimesUpx2.”
And in 2017, just days ahead of President Trump’s inauguration, Meryl Streep drew thunderous applause when she used her acceptance speech for her Golden Globe lifetime achievement award to denounce Trump. “Disrespect invites disrespect, violence incites violence,” she said. “And when the powerful use their position to bully others, we all lose.” Trump responded with an angry tweet calling Streep “overrated.”