Polarization Is Rational
This article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.
The political party that controlled the American South for much of the 20th century was in many ways an authoritarian party. It blocked citizens from voting, prevented opposition parties from forming and sanctioned violence — including murder — to maintain its grip on power.
That party, of course, was the Democratic Party. And many of the same Southern politicians who oversaw a racial apartheid also voted with Franklin D. Roosevelt to create the modern American government — a government that helped build a new middle class through Social Security, union rights, financial regulation, antitrust enforcement and much more.
How could one party be both so reactionary and so progressive at the same time? That’s a story of historical circumstance too complicated to tell in a morning newsletter. But it’s worth remembering just how bizarre and unsustainable the party politics of mid-20th century America were. The Republican Party wasn’t cohesive either, home to both liberals like Thomas Dewey and conservatives like Robert Taft.
Ezra Klein, the founding editor of Vox.com, has a new book out this week, called “Why We’re Polarized.” One of his central arguments is that, if anything, today’s politics are more rational than the midcentury politics we so often celebrate. Back then, the two parties were full of common ground and contradictions. Today, one is a distinctly right-wing party dominated by a single racial group (white people). The other is consistently center-left and is dominated by the diverse residents of metropolitan areas.
This new system obviously has big problems. It has created a largely dysfunctional federal government and helped to elect the least qualified president in American history. To say that the current system is rational — that it might even have been inevitable — isn’t to defend it. But understanding how we got here might help us to fix the problems we’re now facing.
Klein writes, in his conclusion:
It’s a fascinating book, rich in politics, history, psychology and more. On the new episode of “The Argument” podcast, Klein joined me and Ross Douthat to talk — and argue — about today’s polarized politics.