The Downed Ukrainian Airliner: Assessing Blame
To the Editor:
Re “Missiles Fired by Iran Downed Passenger Jet, U.S. and Allies Believe” (front page, Jan. 10):
Under the law, we are responsible for “accidental” consequences of our actions that a rational observer would anticipate. Knowing the tensions, animosities and distrust that cut across Iran and the region, a rational observer would have anticipated the possibility, even the likelihood, of such an accident as the Iranian downing of the Ukrainian jet following the turmoil that our president’s assassination of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani unleashed and the belligerent posturing with which he continues to aggravate that turmoil.
The deaths of the 176 passengers and crew are added to those of Kurds in Syria and Puerto Rican hurricane victims, for which our president’s actions and cruel lack of interest in others’ suffering are responsible.
Through books, op-eds, blogs, etc., hundreds of mental health professionals have warned of the danger represented by the president’s self-absorption, cruelty, recklessness, impulsivity and absence of empathy. That danger is now demonstrably and tragically real. Congress must act to limit his ability to continue killing.
Edwin B. Fisher
Chapel Hill, N.C.
The writer is a clinical psychologist at the Gillings School of Global Public Health at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill and a contributor to “The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump: 37 Psychiatrists and Mental Health Experts Assess a President.”
To the Editor:
If it is confirmed that the jet crash was caused by one or more surface-to-air missiles, whether it was deliberate or accidental, and no matter who launched them, we all know where the buck stops. It stops at the desk of Donald J. Trump, who is ultimately responsible for the deaths of 63 Canadians and the others aboard.
Mike Priaro
Calgary, Alberta
To the Editor:
The tragic loss of 176 people in the crash of a Ukrainian airliner is one of the unintended consequences of war. There is blame all around for this calamity.
The poor judgment to fly a commercial airliner into an airspace with active missile launches taking place is inexplicable.
The Iranian government chose to fire missiles in response to the killing of one of its senior leaders. It is likely one of these Iranian missiles that brought down this plane. It seems unlikely, however, that this was planned, but rather a mistake of targeting a misidentified aircraft — unfortunately something even the United States has done in the past.
The stage was set for this tragedy by our president’s impulse to stir the pot. He created a scenario to boost his standing among Americans because of impeachment, no matter what the consequences might be.
The death of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani was justified for all the death and destruction his leadership caused. The repercussions of his assassination will be played out for years to come.
Paul D. Canvasser
Birmingham, Mich.