The Bloomberg Scenario
This article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.
The main message of the polls from Iowa is that the Democratic race remains unsettled. Four candidates (Joe Biden, Pete Buttigieg, Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren) are bunched near the top, and a couple of others (Amy Klobuchar and Andrew Yang) can reasonably hope to finish strong.
If you have spent any time watching television or YouTube recently, you have probably noticed another candidate, as well: Michael Bloomberg. He has been spending millions of dollars of ads, both to make a case for himself and to criticize President Trump.
The betting markets consider Bloomberg a serious candidate: They give about a 13 percent chance of him being the nominee, better than the chances for Buttigieg, Klobuchar or Yang and only slightly behind Warren.
How could a Bloomberg nomination possibly happen, given that he has not appeared in the debates and isn’t competing in the early states? The recent rise of Sanders in the polls points to the most likely scenario.
Bloomberg’s best hope is for one of the strong progressives — Sanders or Warren — to win both Iowa and New Hampshire. Even better for Bloomberg would be if Sanders and Warren finish one-two in both states. The relative moderates — Biden, Buttigieg and Klobuchar — would then be damaged. But there would still be many moderate Democratic voters anxious about beating Trump and looking for a candidate.
And Bloomberg has some advantages. He is one of the few candidates in the race to have held a major executive post in government. He also has shown arguably the strongest commitment to fighting climate change, as New York magazine’s Jonathan Chait — in a piece titled “Maybe Nominating Bloomberg for President Isn’t a Crazy Idea” — points out.
In The Washington Post this week, John Ellis, formerly of The Boston Globe and Fox News, predicted:
I don’t think this scenario is as likely as Ellis does, and I’m troubled by the notion of a candidate spending so much of his own money to win the presidency — “buying the election,” as Warren has said. But in a race as uncertain as this one, I agree that Bloomberg has a shot.
For more …