Prince Andrew Offers ‘Zero Cooperation’ in Epstein Case, Prosecutor Says
Two months ago, Britain’s Prince Andrew issued a public statement saying he would be willing to help American law enforcement officials with their investigation into allegations of sex-trafficking by Jeffrey Epstein and his associates.
F.B.I. agents and federal prosecutors in New York took him at his word. They reached out to his lawyers and asked to interview him.
There was no response at all, according to three people familiar with the investigation.
On Monday, in a rare move, the United States attorney in Manhattan publicly called out the prince for breaking his commitment.
“To date, Prince Andrew has provided zero cooperation,” the prosecutor, Geoffrey S. Berman, said in response to a question at a news conference outside Mr. Epstein’s Upper East Side mansion.
Mr. Berman said his office does not typically comment on cooperation in an ongoing investigation, but he felt it was “fair” for the public to know that Prince Andrew had failed to live up to his own promise.
Prince Andrew, following a disastrous television interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation over his ties to Mr. Epstein, said late last year he would cooperate with law enforcement agencies in their investigations into the disgraced financier and his associates.
“Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required,” he said in a statement.
It was not clear how investigators conveyed their request to interview Prince Andrew. Typically, if American prosecutors wanted to speak with a witness in Britain, the F.B.I. would go through its legal attaché in London, based in the United States embassy there.
Mr. Epstein hanged himself last summer at a jail in Manhattan, where he was awaiting trial on federal sex trafficking and conspiracy charges. Prosecutors had accused him of sexually exploiting dozens of women and girls in New York and Florida.
Shortly after Mr. Epstein’s death, Mr. Berman said in a statement that the investigation into the sex-trafficking conspiracy was not finished and prosecutors were committed to standing up for the “brave young women” Mr. Epstein had abused. Attorney General William P. Barr has also vowed to bring charges against anyone who helped Mr. Epstein.
Federal prosecutors reached out to Prince Andrew as their investigation into Mr. Epstein’s former employees, girlfriends and associates continued.
Prince Andrew, 59, suggested in his television interview last year that he could not “shed light” on Mr. Epstein’s activities for investigators because the two had only spent a few days at a time together. He also said he would have to consult with his lawyers before testifying under oath about his ties to Mr. Epstein.
American prosecutors may be interested in speaking with the prince because of his friendship with Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who was Mr. Epstein’s former girlfriend. She has been accused in lawsuits of acting as a top recruiter for Mr. Epstein, procuring girls and young women for him to sexually abuse.
Ms. Maxwell, who has previously denied any wrongdoing, is one of Mr. Epstein’s associates who has been under the scrutiny of investigators. She was one of four women named as possible co-conspirators and granted immunity from prosecution in a widely criticized plea bargain that Mr. Epstein struck with federal prosecutors in Florida more than a decade ago.
Mr. Epstein’s suicide brought renewed attention to his relationships with prominent figures in politics, academia and business — including Prince Andrew, the second son of Queen Elizabeth II, who is also known as the Duke of York. A representative for Buckingham Palace did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Mr. Epstein’s social orbit included two American presidents — Bill Clinton and Donald Trump. He cultivated relationships with billionaires like Bill Gates and Leslie Wexner. His friend and former lawyer, Alan Dershowitz, recently joined President Trump’s defense team in the impeachment proceedings.
All of the men have denied any wrongdoing and denied knowing about Mr. Epstein’s alleged sex trafficking.
Prince Andrew has said he met Mr. Epstein in 1999 and has acknowledged being Mr. Epstein’s houseguest. Several news organizations have reported that Prince Andrew and Mr. Epstein partied together in New York, Palm Beach and London, and vacationed together in Thailand and in the Caribbean. They were once photographed taking a walk together in Central Park.
The friendship continued after Mr. Epstein pleaded guilty in 2008 in Florida to charges of soliciting prostitution and served 13 months in a county jail under a plea deal. After Mr. Epstein’s release in 2010, Prince Andrew stayed at his Manhattan mansion and drew fire for continuing the relationship.
One of Mr. Epstein’s accusers, Virginia Roberts Giuffre, has said that Mr. Epstein trafficked her to Prince Andrew when she was 17 years old. She said she had sex with the prince three times, including once at Ms. Maxwell’s home.
In 2011, a photograph was published that Ms. Giuffre said was taken in 2001. The snapshot showed Prince Andrew standing alongside her in a London apartment with his arm wrapped around her bare waist and Ms. Maxwell standing in the background.
A second woman, Johanna Sjoberg, has said in legal filings that Prince Andrew posed for a second photograph in 2001 with her and Ms. Giuffre. In that picture, court papers said, the prince is touching their breasts.
Prince Andrew has denied any wrongdoing. He also maintains he did not know Mr. Epstein was sexually abusing teenage girls. “At no stage during the limited time I spent with him did I see, witness or suspect any behavior of the sort that subsequently led to his arrest and conviction,” the prince said in a different statement last summer.
The BBC interview with Prince Andrew came a few months after Mr. Epstein’s death. Viewers found the explanation of his friendship with Mr. Epstein to be unpersuasive and unremorseful, causing an uproar in Britain. Facing mounting criticism, he announced he was withdrawing from his royal duties in November.
During the interview, he said he could not have had sex with Ms. Giuffre because he remembered taking one of his daughters to a restaurant called Pizza Express that night in 2001.
When asked whether he regretted continuing his friendship with Mr. Epstein after the financier was convicted of soliciting a minor for prostitution, the prince said: “Do I regret the fact that he has quite obviously conducted himself in a manner unbecoming? Yes.”
“Unbecoming?” the BBC interviewer replied. “He was a sex offender.”