In a Dying Country, Garth Greenwell’s Narrator Comes Alive
Garth Greenwell’s first novel, “What Belongs to You” (2016), uses mesmeric cadences. The world observed and the interior life are slowed down, the rhythms in the prose given a strange and powerful nervous energy, every nuance and angle offered their due. Narrated by a poet in a foreign country, the novel and its inflections suggest that feeling itself is almost foreign and hard to pin down; that it has to be outlined with many subclauses, digressions and asides. Language becomes a way of holding experience close before it dissolves in your hand. Some of the scenes in the book, such as when the narrator watches a boy on a train, have the aura of beautifully rich film, something captured with meticulous attention to every shift of light and atmosphere. These scenes are created with a great moody melancholy, the narrator fully aware how soon they will be over and how they must be secured before they crumble.
In much the way that other male American writers, such as Hemingway, Baldwin and Edmund White, have chosen Paris as the place in which their lone protagonist can be tested and changed, Greenwell uses Sofia, the capital of Bulgaria, as his caldron. He returns there in his new book, “Cleanness,” a story collection that revisits not only the setting but many of the themes and dynamics of his debut novel. As in “What Belongs to You,” the narrator throughout “Cleanness” is an American teacher in Sofia who has learned some Bulgarian, a gay man who has come to terms with his sexuality but is alert to an intolerant world.
In “Mentor,” the first story, when our expatriate meets a student in a cafe, the student talks openly about his homosexuality. As in the novel, Greenwell displays an extraordinary skill at handling time. The tone is hushed, the student wants to share his isolation and his pain without any display of drama. Slowly, we get a sense that while this, for the student, is unresolved experience, for the teacher it is how he lives. The way in which the two connect is unhurried, handled with subtlety. What we know, we learn by implication.
[ Read an excerpt from “Cleanness.” ]
In this book, as in the novel, part of Sofia’s allure is that it is disintegrating, as Bulgaria itself is failing. In the last page of “What Belongs to You,” Greenwell writes that “the population declines and the warnings in the paper grow more strident and the nation itself becomes a little less real, fading away, some fear, to nothing.” Bulgaria is “a dying country.” In one of the stories, the language “as the country shrinks is spoken by fewer people each day; it’s not difficult to imagine it disappearing altogether, the language and the country both.” In a later story, the narrator says: “That’s the real problem. … So many people leave, so many of the best people, it’s hard for things to get better when so many people leave.”
Greenwell’s version of Sofia sometimes allows him to isolate his characters in a densely made monochrome. He can remove them from any natural hinterland, cover them in mystery and then allow them to emerge into a scrupulously modulated clarity.
While alert to Bulgaria as a country that his best students wish to abandon, the narrator also, at times, takes enormous pleasure in the city of Sofia itself, in the Bulgarian language, in the landscape around him, in the gnarled and dense history of which he can only catch glimpses. Greenwell’s book is a sort of wistful paean to the place where his protagonist lived in uneasy exile, or learned to grow up, or both.
“Decent People,” the longest story, takes place during a demonstration in Sofia. It is a piece of bravura writing, depending on slow accretion of detail, allowing the protagonist, who has been a solitary figure in the first two stories, to become socialized, to engage us in ways that are less edgy and dark.
In “Gospodar,” the narrator insists, during a sadomasochistic sexual encounter delineated in stark, explicit detail, that he wants “to be nothing.” In “The Little Saint,” the sadomasochistic scene is described in a style that is both clinically precise and fiercely sensual. The story relishes the elaborate rules of the game, the excitement of the moment. While he writes about sex graphically, Greenwell uses a crisp style to disguise the fact that he is really attempting to chart the characters’ complicated emotional needs. The writing about sex in this story achieves an unusual depth of accuracy both about physical activity and emotional undercurrent.
While the title story involves another intense encounter between two gay men, the theme of coming out is handled here in ways that are almost political. But as Greenwell moves his story back into the realm of the personal, in a risky moment on which the narrative turns, he has a young gay man express a sense of piercing private pain, acknowledging damage done years before. To capture the raw anguish being shared for the first time, Greenwell uses many words of one syllable, like stabbing, staccato sounds: “I don’t know if I was like this before,” the character confides. “How can I know what’s me and what’s what he did to me? I know it’s stupid, but what if he made me this way, how can I be proud of it then?” It’s an exquisite piece of writing that uses a simple plaintive system to create a complex emotional effect.
The unnamed expatriate in these stories is delicate, vulnerable, needy, thoughtful. He is someone who could be easily crushed emotionally, but he is also a born noticer, and less opaque than the main character in “What Belongs to You.” Since he narrates all of these free-standing stories in the first person, there is a cumulative effect as though the book were a novel. The reader begins each new story with concern for the main character; he is like one of those young men in 19th-century French fiction setting out to receive his sentimental education.
One of the problems that any gay writer faces is how to depict happiness. The drama lies often in the quality of the secrecy, the terms of the struggle, the nature of the loneliness, the manner in which all projects seem doomed. In a note written in 1960 on his novel “Maurice,” a book finished in 1914 but not published until 1971, E. M. Forster, who did not wish to create a tragic ending for his gay characters, wrote: “I was determined that in fiction anyway two men should fall in love and remain in it for the ever and ever that fiction allows.”
In some of the stories in “Cleanness,” Greenwell fully explores what fear and secrecy and solitude look like for gay men. And in the brilliantly executed final story, set in a Bulgarian disco, “An Evening Out,” he deals with shame: “the shame I was accustomed to, the shame that felt like home.” However, in the second section of his book, called “Loving R.,” he dramatizes happiness, allowing the protagonist and his partner from the Azores to feel a powerful love for each other, managing to describe this with the same close attention to grades of feeling and changes in mood, and indeed erotic frankness, as in other stories.
The best of these stories, “The Frog King,” rivals John Updike’s “The Happiest I Have Been,” set in the same Christmas season, as a great American story about happiness. As his lover snuggles against him, the protagonist thinks: “They could make a whole life, I thought, surprised to think it, these moments that filled me up with sweetness, that had changed the texture of existence for me. I had never thought anything like it before.”