Audubon Society
SUNDAY PUZZLE — You know those puzzles where your first guess is never right, not once?  Where the constructor sneaks in alternate meanings, twists of phrase, surprising variant definitions, dry punnery?  Those puzzles are cats, predators that cruelly toy with their prey (and decimate songbirds, by the way, which is why you need to dress every cat you encounter in a Elizabethan ruff, be it inside or outdoors).  Today’s puzzle is not a cat; today’s puzzle is a herding dog, here to provide you with amusement and wisdom without making your brain nervous that it can’t keep up.  

Brian Herrick makes his debut today, as a co-constructor with Christopher Adams.  We had a Christopher Adams Sunday puzzle last year, a series of anagrams that was very well-done and interesting; this is his fourth puzzle over all.  Mr. Herrick, according to Will Shortz’s print introduction, works in communications for a nonprofit that funds diabetes research, and Christopher Adams is a pro constructor and solver who lives in Iowa City (see 71A).  The pair connected via the Crossword Puzzle Collaboration Directory;  Mr. Herrick provided the theme, Mr. Adams fleshed it out and the two filled the grid via email exchange.
This is a pretty smooth solve, if you’re seasoned — there’s no avalanche of newfangled terms and phrases, and a lot of the fill is straightforwardly clued.   There are a couple of unexpected debuts (LINGUINE?  Che sorpresa!) and some small conundrums.   I really liked the jokes that I guessed the punch lines for right away, like PERM, NO REASON, AYES, ARSE, and so on.  I have no problem with wholesome groaners, they’re the wordplay version of comfort food.
14A: We’ve seen this first name before in the clues, for Dumbledore the headmaster, but never the answers, and I’m not a Potterhead.  This could be a Natick with Mort at 18D; I’ll be curious to see who doesn’t know ALBUS and SAHL (I’m betting most people know one or the other).  

42A: This term, APOLUNE,  is moon-specific and rarely used in the crossword; its Earthly counterpart is the more recognizable apogee and its solar equivalent is  the aphelion.
87A: This entry filled in on the crosses for me and reminds me of that Lone Ranger joke (cartoon? song? Don’t really know). I’ve never heard the exact phrase WHOS WE, but I love it especially when talking about pluralis majestatis.
34D: O.K., I went the culinary route here at first, but ON POT is apropos enough for “Baked.”
42D: Do the pooh-bas on ARUBA play the tuba while they scuba?  This is a very cute clue.
102D: This one is too straightforward to be believed!  I assumed “matchmaking” to refer to dating and was stymied and bemused, after getting ASPEN on crosses.  I had never thought about the kind of wood that actual matches, kitchen matches to light your candles, is made of.
Everyone saw the title, right? Today’s “Audubon Society” puzzle is about boids, or birbs, as the youth refer to them these days.   There are eight theme entries scattered throughout, marked with an asterisk, and a revealer tucked in at 115A.  I strongly suspect that at least two of those theme entries will be softballs for each of us (which ones will depend on the individual solver); once you get two, you’re going to know this theme.
For example, the pop music fan among us (ooh ooh hand raised) might have solved that first theme entry at 23A, “‘Soak Up the Sun’ singer, 2002” in seven notes (I really do love that loopy guitar intro).  It’s SHERYL CROW.   Slightly less obvious was the other “singer” today (human, anyhow) at 49D, “with the most American Music Awards of all time (29).”  I knew it was TAYLOR SWIFT because she also won “Artist of the Decade” at last year’s AMA show and performed a widely-shared medley that included an enormous cast and ended in a Misty Copeland performance.

Hmm, Audubon, CROW, SWIFT?  The rest of this theme is a lark.  
Next to Sheryl, there’s a reference to a classic fictional character whose clue might be a little tricky, if the solver doesn’t know “To Kill a Mockingbird” —  SCOUT FINCH.   Thematically, I pair her with the other literary example in the grid, the much-heralded poet, novelist, lyricist and playwright RITA DOVE, at 112A.   
In a case of “birds of a feather,” half of the theme entries come from the movies.  There are two actresses.  One I know as a player of hard-core roles, including Ellen Ripley; the other, while out of my wheelhouse, deducible (and her character on “Dynasty” looks pretty wild).  
Then there are two roles, both complex women in nail-biting suspense films, both played by famous actresses (Jodie Foster and Janet Leigh).
Suitably, the revealer is also cinematic, referencing a film from 2017, LADY BIRD, that starred the wonderful Saoirse Ronan.  
Every lady’s last name is a bird!  Also, everyone is a gripping, spirited, interesting character, even that over-the-top soap role that I knew nothing about.    I also really appreciated how many interesting women were used in the fill today, including ATALANTA, FRANKIE, LYN St. James, ANA Ivanovic.   Poor POLLO, though!  That rice joke wasn’t right, guys.

Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
What did you think?