A Different Kind of Heroine, and Not Just Because She Wants to Be a Viking

WHEN WE WERE VIKINGS
By Andrew David MacDonald
An early scene haunts Andrew David MacDonald’s well-intentioned debut novel. Zelda MacLeish is celebrating her 21st birthday. During her party, she persuades her brother, Gert, to watch an old home movie of their mother playing with 6-year-old Zelda while, off-camera, their father films the action. This movie represents almost everything Zelda has left of her parents; “almost” because they’re both gone, but her beloved Gert is here and devoted to her care. That Zelda still needs care at 21 is her parents’ other legacy: Because she was born on the fetal alcohol syndrome spectrum, Zelda’s ability to live alone is in question, even as she fights for independence.
“When We Were Vikings” is the tale of Zelda’s quest for autonomy, and MacDonald charts her course admirably. By rendering typical coming-of-age milestones (breaking with family, first kiss, first job) through Zelda’s decidedly atypical perspective, MacDonald rejects longstanding stereotypes and introduces a 21st-century heroine who is fearless and capable — and who, by the way, happens to be neurodivergent. Unfortunately, while it’s impossible not to root for Zelda, MacDonald’s creative choices occasionally blur the lines between adult and Y.A. fiction, which distracts from the narrative and undermines his efforts.
First, the beauty: Zelda is a marvel, a living, breathing three-dimensional character with a voice so distinctive she leaps off the page. Her dream is to be a real-life Viking hero, and she pursues this goal in earnest. She studies Viking lore, learns words in Old Norse and catalogs Viking facts and beliefs to ground and guide her. One such list, THINGS LEGENDS NEED, becomes the meta-script, or playbook, for the novel’s central conflict, which occurs when Gert falls in with possible criminals and Zelda decides to help. While much of this — along with MacDonald’s exaggerated metaphors, simplified themes, broadly drawn characters and predictable action — seems too juvenile for adult readers, it’s all appropriate, and appropriately rendered, for a coming-of-age novel.
If I could, I’d stop here. No one wants to knock a first-time author, especially one tackling ableism and identity. However, MacDonald fumbles a critical aspect of Zelda’s becoming — her sexual awakening — in a way that’s troubling yet all too familiar. Sex permeates “When We Were Vikings.” There are dirty jokes, double entendres, come-ons, threats and straight-up violence, little of which Zelda understands or appreciates. It’s unclear whether MacDonald expects us to laugh at her naïveté or feel horrified on her behalf; either way, the net effect is jarring.
Having once been young, I can confirm that Zelda’s preoccupation with French-kissing and losing her virginity rings true. But MacDonald places her in sexual situations that leave her unsatisfied and diminished; Zelda is, by turns, infantilized, duped and very nearly raped. In a book that so lovingly celebrates her autonomy, it’s again unclear why she’s consistently portrayed as powerless — once maybe, but three times? — and this lack of clarity makes these scenes feel gratuitous, as if they were superimposed on the Y.A. themes to reposition the book. Intentional or not (MacDonald is an otherwise respectful writer), given our cultural landscape, authors at every stage are obliged to reach a higher bar when illustrating female sexuality. The bar rises even higher when sexuality is juxtaposed with disability and consent.
“It felt like the world was happening around me,” Zelda says after her first sexual experience, “and I was not a part of it anymore.” Though we all may feel this way sometimes, Zelda deserves better — as does the reader. Erotic escapades can fuel legendary adventures, but they can also be the stuff of nightmares. To those who write about them, I say this: Choose wisely.