Afghan War Casualty Report: January 2020
At least 87 pro-government forces and 12 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week, as violent incidents occurred with greater frequency after a brief lull in Taliban attacks due, in part, to cold weather. The deadliest attack took place in Baghlan Province, where an insider attack killed 18 police officers, including the unit commander. One day later, in Kunduz Province, another 13 security forces were killed when the Taliban attacked security outposts in the Dasht-e-Archi District center. Earlier in the week, six civilians in Balkh Province were killed when Afghan Air Forces bombed a house in Boqa village. Two American soldiers — Lt. Col. Paul K. Voss and Capt. Ryan S. Phaneuf — were also killed when the aircraft they were piloting crashed in the Deh Yak District of Ghazni Province. An investigation into the crash is underway, though harsh weather is suspected to have played a role.
Jan. 30 Baghlan Province: two police killed
The Taliban attacked a military base in Dahan-e-Ghori District, killing two police officers and wounding six others.
Jan. 29 Ghor Province: one civilian killed
A civilian returning home from prayer was shot and killed by the Taliban in the Sarjangel village of Morghab District. Insurgents claimed the man was a government spy.
Jan. 29 Badakhshan Province: one militia member killed
A pro-government militia member was killed by the Taliban in his house in the Shashpul village of Baharak District.
Jan. 29 Herat Province: five territorial army soldiers killed
The Taliban attacked a local army outpost in the Kariz-Zaman village of Koshk-e-Kohna District, killing five local soldiers and wounding another. Three other soldiers were wounded when their vehicle was hit by a roadside bomb planted by insurgents.
Jan. 29 Kunduz Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban killed a police officer in the Third Police District of Kunduz City before taking his vehicle and fleeing.
Jan. 29 Kunduz Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was killed and four others were wounded by a Taliban fighter who was patrolling the Kunduz-Takhar highway.
Jan. 29 Badghis Province: two police officers killed
Two police officers were killed and two others were wounded when the Taliban attacked a police outpost in the village of Lakhshak-e-Qarchaghi in Qadis District.
Jan. 29 Uruzgan Province: eight police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a police checkpoint in the center of Tarin Kot District, killing six police officers. Two additional police officers who arrived as backup also were killed. Four other officers were wounded.
Jan. 29 Kunduz Province: 13 security forces killed
The Taliban attacked security outposts in Dasht-e-Archi District center, killing 12 soldiers and one police officer. Four additional security forces were wounded, including three police officers, and fighting went on for nearly six hours as both outposts collapsed to insurgents. The outposts were recaptured after air support arrived.
Jan. 29 Sar-i-Pul Province: one militia member killed
The Taliban attacked the Korak-e-Mughul outpost in the provincial capital, killing one pro-government militia member and wounding another.
Jan. 28 Faryab Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked the Gujer Abad village’s national police outpost in Andkhoi District, killing one police officer before being pushed out of the village.
Jan. 28 Faryab Province: two security forces killed
The Taliban attacked the Almar District center, killing one police officer and one officer of the National Directorate of Safety. Three other N.D.S. officers were wounded during the lengthy clash, and district officials claim a Taliban commander was killed as well.
Jan. 28 Baghlan Province: 18 police officers killed
An insider attack led to the deaths of 18 police officers in the Dasht-e-Khwaja Alwan area in Pul-e-Khumri City, the provincial capital. Another officer was wounded, and reinforcements were blocked by insurgents, allowing the Taliban to capture and burn the base after seizing the equipment.
Jan. 27 Ghazni Province: two American service members killed
Lt. Col. Paul K. Voss and Capt. Ryan S. Phaneuf were killed when the Bombardier E-11A aircraft they were piloting crashed in Deh Yak District during a day of harsh weather. The cause of the crash is under investigation.

Jan. 27 Kandahar Province: four soldiers killed
The Taliban attacked an army outpost in Khakrez District, killing four soldiers before being pushed back from the area.
Jan. 27 Kunduz Province: two police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Mosazai area of Khan Abad-Ali Abad District highway, killing two police officers and holding two others hostage.
Jan. 27 Badghis Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was killed in a clash between the Taliban and Afghan forces near the center of the Bala Murghab District.
Jan. 27 Faryab Province: one civilian and one soldier killed
One soldier was killed and four others were wounded then the Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Shakh Bazaar area of the Qaisar District center. Meanwhile, a 10-year-old child was killed by a mortar fired by Afghan security forces, which also injured another child.
Jan. 27 Jowzjan Province: three security forces killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Kokaldash Village of Faiz Abad District, killing one police officer and two members of the National Directorate of Safety, while wounding nine others.
Jan. 27 Baghlan Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked Khwaja Zaid security outpost on the Kabul-Baghlan Highway. Reinforcements were sent to defend against the Taliban, but the insurgents ambushed the unit, killing one officer and wounding two others.
Jan. 26 Herat Province: one civilian killed
A religious scholar named Mullah Gholam Mohammed was shot and killed by unknown armed men in the Eighth Police District of Herat City.
Jan. 26 Herat Province: one government employee killed
Mullah Abdulhamid Ahmadi, the Haj and religious affairs Manager of Pashtun Zarghun District, was shot and killed by unknown gunmen on a motorcycle in the village of Kurt-e- Khwaja. The attackers managed to escape from the area.
Jan. 26 Kunduz Province: six soldiers killed
The Taliban attacked Alif Birdy security outpost in Imam Sahib District, killing six soldiers and wounding seven before reinforcements arrived to repel the attack.
Jan. 25 Balkh Province: seven civilians killed
A coalition airstrike hit a house in the Boqa village of Balkh District, killing three women and four children.
Jan 25 Jowzjan Province: nine pro-government militia killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Seh Shanba area of Sheberghan, the provincial capital, killing nine pro-government militia members and wounding seven others.
Jan. 24 Jowzjan Province: two soldiers killed
Two soldiers were killed and five others were wounded when the Taliban attacked Khanjar security outpost in the center of Mingajik District.
Jan. 24 Kandahar Province: two civilians killed
A 12-year-old girl was killed by Afghan soldiers in Shah Wali Kot District. When her father carried her body to the gates of the army base in the village the next day, he, too, ended up dead, officials said. Her relatives went to the base to protest and to seek an explanation, but soldiers inexplicably opened fire on them, and also wounded her uncle. The government appointed a delegation to investigate the incident.
At least 13 pro-government forces and seven civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week. The deadliest attack took place in Faryab Province, when four armed men entered a house in the village of Khanaqa, in Andkhoy District, and killed six members of a single family, including women and children. The Afghan government blamed the incident on the Taliban, which denied any involvement. Later in the week, in Baghlan-e-Markazi District, the Taliban attacked a security outpost, killing a total of five security forces in the initial attack and ensuing battle with reinforcements.
Jan. 23 Baghlan Province: five security forces killed
Four police officers were killed and seven others wounded when the Taliban attacked a security outpost in Baghlan-e-Markazi District. Fighting went on for nearly three hours, and a fifth security force was killed when reinforcements arrived and were attacked by insurgents. Local authorities claimed that five Taliban fighters were killed, and the militants were eventually pushed back.
Jan. 23 Takhar Province: two police officers killed
Two police officers were killed when the Taliban attacked the village of Chaila in Baharak District, where fighting continued for several hours. Local authorities claimed that five insurgent fighters were also killed.
Jan. 22 Faryab Province: three soldiers killed
Three soldiers, including the executive officer of the Second Battalion, were killed by a roadside bomb in the center of Khwaja Sabz Posh District. Two other soldiers were injured.
Jan. 22 Faryab Province: one civilian killed
One civilian was killed and six were wounded when a hand grenade was thrown at a pharmacy in the center of Dawlat Abad District. Police have arrested one person in connection to the incident.
Jan. 21 Kandahar Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was killed and another was wounded when two armed men on a motorcycle opened fire in the First Police District in Kandahar City, the provincial capital. The attackers were subsequently chased by security forces and killed.
Jan. 19 Uruzgan Province: two police officers killed
Two police officers were killed by two armed men on a motorcycle while patrolling in the Toori area of Tarin Kot, the provincial capital. The attackers managed to escape from the area.
Jan. 18 Faryab Province: six civilians killed
Six members of a single family, including women and children, were killed when four armed men entered their house in the village of Khanaqa in Andkhoy District. An additional two people were wounded, and the Afghan government blamed the incident on the Taliban, who denied involvement.
At least 13 pro-government forces and 11 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week, with the total number of incidents continuing to decline compared to previous months as the Taliban offered to reduce violence in the area in its ongoing peace negotiations with American diplomats. The deadliest attack took place in the Khan Abad District of Kunduz Province, where a Taliban red unit attacked a local security outpost and killed 11 police officers. That same day, five civilians were killed in Zabul Province when an electrician’s vehicle was hit by a roadside bomb.

Jan. 16 Zabul Province: five civilians killed
An electrician’s vehicle was hit by a roadside bomb in the Sharisafa District, killing five people who worked for a private company that had been contracted to erect electrical poles on the highway from Ghazni to Zabul Province.
Jan. 16 Kunduz Province: 11 police officers killed
A Taliban red unit attacked a security outpost in the Nawabad-e-Andarabiha village of Khan Abad District, killing 11 police officers and wounding two others over several hours of fighting before the insurgents were pushed back.
Jan. 14 Balkh Province: two civilians killed
Two children were killed during an explosion in the Ninth Police District of Mazar-i-Sharif City, the provincial capital. There was a subsequent explosion when people arrived at the scene, wounding another seven civilians and the district governor’s bodyguard.
Jan. 13 Balkh Province: three civilians killed
A mortar fired by Afghan security forces hit a house in the Ori village of Zarei District, killing three civilians, including one young girl.
Jan. 13 Uruzgan Province: two police officers killed
Two police officers were killed by their colleagues in Tarin Kot, the provincial capital, and the attacker managed to seize weapons and escape from the area.
Jan. 12 Takhar Province: one civilian killed
A Taliban rocket hit a house in the Noorkhil village of Darqad District, killing one 16-year-old girl and wounding two other women.
At least 13 pro-government forces and three civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week. The number of casualties decreased considerably compared to previous weeks, likely because of the cold weather. The deadliest attack took place in the Dawlat Abad District of Takhar Province, where a Taliban member wearing a burqa opened fire on security forces in the Chaghatoi area, killing three members of the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan’s intelligence agency. Three other N.D.S. members were wounded in the attack.
Jan. 8 Herat Province: one soldier killed
One army officer was shot and killed by unknown gunmen in the Eighth Police District of Herat City, the provincial capital. The attackers were on a motorcycle and managed to escape from the scene.
Jan. 8 Farah Province: two pilots killed
A military helicopter crashed in Purchaman District, killing two pilots on board. Investigators attributed the crash to bad weather.
Jan. 7 Faryab Province: three security forces killed
A Taliban member wearing a burqa opened fire on security forces in the Chaghatoi area of Dawlat Abad District, killing three members of the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan’s intelligence agency, and wounding three others.
Jan. 5 Kunduz Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked security forces in the Angorbagh area of Kunduz City, killing one police officer and wounding another.
Jan. 5 Samangan Province: two civilians killed
The Taliban killed two civilians in the Baloch village of Dara-i-Suf Payin District and left their bodies in the street. The area is controlled by the Taliban, and the reason for the attack remains unclear.
Jan. 5 Sar-i-Pul Province: two security forces killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Korak-e-Moghul village in the provincial capital, killing two pro-government militia members over nearly two hours of fighting. Local authorities claimed that four Taliban fighters were also killed.
Jan. 5 Helmand Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was killed and four others were wounded when a bomb attached to a police vehicle exploded in the Bolan area of Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital.
Jan. 5 Faryab Province: one soldier killed
The Taliban attacked an army outpost in Qaisar District, killing one soldier and wounding another over two hours of fighting.
Jan. 4 Herat Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was shot and killed by unknown gunmen on a motorcycle in the center of Obeh District. The attackers managed to escape from the area.
Jan. 4 Herat Province: one soldier killed
One soldier was killed when the Taliban attacked a security outpost in the village of Jue-e-Naw in Kohsan District, where clashes continued for nearly three hours.
Jan. 3 Badghis Province: one child killed
One child, who had been looking after his sheep, was killed in a roadside bomb explosion in the village of Na-khod-Amodah in Qadis District.
At least 109 pro-government forces and 11 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week. The deadliest attack took place in the Khowaja Bahauddin District in Takhar Province, where a Taliban red unit attacked a security outpost and killed 17 pro-government militia members. A day earlier, another 16 Afghan soldiers were killed in Helmand Province after insurgents planted explosives beneath an Army checkpoint in Sangin District.
Jan. 2 Helmand Province: one civilian killed
A radio station technician was killed in the Second Police District of Lashkar Gah, where officials found his body and discovered he had been tortured and shot several times. An official investigation is underway.
Jan. 2 Baghlan Province: five local police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Baghlan-e-Markazi District, killing five local police officers and wounding two others.
Jan. 2 Herat Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban shot and killed one police officer in the Saq-dan village of Ghoryan District. The attackers managed to escape from the scene.
Jan. 1 Balkh Province: nine police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost on the Balkh-Jowzjan highway, leaving nine police officers dead before blocking the highway and capturing the nearby villages of Baba Yousit, AlamKhil and Boka.
Jan. 1 Faryab Province: five security forces killed
The Taliban attacked the center of Belcheragh District, killing two commandos, one police officer and one member of the territorial army. Two other commandos were wounded in the clash.
Jan. 1 Kunduz Province: 14 security forces killed
The Taliban attacked security outposts in Dasht-e-Archi District, killing 14 security forces, including 10 members of the National Directorate of Security, two soldiers and two local police officers. An additional two security forces were wounded and three outposts fell to Taliban control.
Dec. 31 Kunduz Province: one traffic police officer killed
A traffic police officer was killed by unknown gunmen in the Third Police District of Kunduz City.
Dec. 31 Takhar Province: seven security forces killed
The Taliban ambushed a convoy of security forces in the Qara Tapa village of Darqad District, killing seven security forces, including four local police officers and three soldiers, and wounding six others.
Dec. 31 Faryab Province: four police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the center of Gorziwan District, killing four police officers and wounding five others.
Dec. 31 Balkh Province: one civilian killed
An unknown gunman killed a woman in the Konjak village of Koshenda District. The district is currently under Taliban control, and officials suspect the insurgent group is responsible for the murder.
Dec. 31 Herat Province: one civilian killed
One civilian was killed and another was injured when while traveling from Herat City a roadside bomb detonated in Golran District.
Dec. 31 Herat Province: one N.D.S. officer killed
The Taliban attacked a government vehicle in the Qala-e-Rig village of Zendah Jan District, killing one N.D.S. officer and wounding two others.
Dec. 30 Helmand Province: four civilians killed
Four civilians, including two women and a child, were killed when a roadside bomb planted by the Taliban detonated in the Sarkhod area of Nawa District.
Dec. 30 Faryab Province: two civilians killed
Two children were killed when a bomb went off while they were playing in Qwzil Qishlaq village of Khwaja Sabz Posh District.
Dec. 30 Jowzjan Province: 14 security forces killed
Fourteen security forces, including N.D.S officers, pro-government militia members and police officers, were killed in a clash between the Taliban and Afghan forces in the Hairdar Abad outpost in Faizabad District.
Dec. 29 Badghis Province: two border police killed
Two border police officers on patrol were killed by a roadside bomb in the Sang-e-Atash area of Moqor District.
Dec. 29 Sar-i-Pul Province: two soldiers killed
The Taliban attacked a military base in the Balghali area of Sar-i-Pul City, the provincial capital, where a roadside bomb hit a Humvee, killing two Afghan soldiers and wounding three others.
Dec. 29 Takhar Province: 17 pro-government militia members killed
A Taliban red unit attacked a security outpost in the Lalah Gozar area of Khowaja Bahauddin District, killing 17 pro-government militia members and wounding four others. The insurgents were eventually pushed back.
Dec. 28 Faryab Province: two pro-government militia members killed
The Taliban attacked the center of Almar District, killing two pro-government militia members and wounding one other.
Dec. 28 Sar-i-Pul Province: one local police officer killed
The Taliban attacked a local police outpost on the Sar-i-Pul Jowzjan highway, killing one local officer.
Dec. 28 Baghlan Province: four soldiers killed
The Taliban attacked Charshanba Tepa security outpost on Baghlan-Kunduz Highway, killing four soldiers and taking three others hostage. The insurgents then overran the outpost.
Dec. 28 Helmand Province: 16 soldiers killed
The Taliban planted explosives under an army checkpoint in Sangin District. Sixteen soldiers were killed in the subsequent explosion while four managed to escape.
Dec. 27 Samangan Province: one N.D.S. officer killed
A convoy of Afghan forces was ambushed by the Taliban in Dara-e-Suf Payan District. One N.D.S. officer was killed, while three others were wounded.
Dec. 27 Badakhshan Province: one commando killed
A Humvee of Afghan commandos who were preparing for an operation against the Taliban was hit by a roadside bomb in Nusai District, killing one and wounding three others.
Dec. 27 Jowzjan Province: two soldiers killed
A Humvee of Afghan soldiers was hit by a roadside bomb in Faizabad District, killing two soldiers and wounding two others.
Dec. 27 Helmand Province: one civilian killed
A man was shot and killed by the Taliban in Washir District.
Dec. 27 Helmand Province: one civilian killed
A woman was killed and one police officer was injured when a bomb attached to a police vehicle exploded in Nawa District.