The Journalist and the Murderers
RACE AGAINST TIME
A Reporter Reopens the Unsolved Murder Cases of the Civil Rights Era
By Jerry Mitchell
In “Race Against Time,” Jerry Mitchell chronicles belated efforts — many of them spurred by his own work as a journalist — to prosecute perpetrators of racially motivated violence in Alabama and Mississippi during the 1960s. Beginning in the 1980s, as a reporter for the Jackson, Miss., Clarion-Ledger, Mitchell decided to reinvestigate unsolved civil-rights-era murder cases, pursuing old leads, uncovering new evidence and publishing article after article after article. His journalistic coups revealed an uncanny ability to wheedle incriminating remarks from defensive suspects and damning observations from unfriendly witnesses.
A vivid, quick-paced, accessible account of horrific crimes, “Race Against Time” focuses on four cases in which Mitchell’s reporting played a role. One is the assassination of Medgar Evers on June 12, 1963. A stalwart leader of the Mississippi affiliate of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Evers organized challenges to Jim Crow oppression in every conceivable guise, a daunting mission that kept him busy in the country’s most racially retrograde state. Alighting from his car late at night in front of his home, and clutching a bundle of T-shirts emblazoned with the slogan “Jim Crow Must Go,” he was hit by a rifle shot and fell to the ground bleeding. His wife and three small children did what they could to comfort him in his last minutes of life.
State authorities twice prosecuted for the murder Byron De La Beckwith, a fervent white supremacist whose guilt was supported by overwhelming evidence. But he escaped conviction owing to hung juries. Nearly three decades later, Mitchell’s revelation that the Mississippi Sovereignty Commission, a pro-segregationist state agency, had secretly assisted Beckwith’s defense put pressure on officials to consider another trial. In 1994, in one of the South’s first “atonement” prosecutions — widely understood as seeking to expiate past wrongs and highlight racial progress in the Deep South — a third jury (the first in the case to include black jurors) finally convicted him.
A second case was the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Ala., on Sept. 15, 1963, in which four young girls were killed. The bomb was planted by Klansmen the night before. For a long time, no state or federal prosecutions ensued. One problem was that the F.B.I. refused to share evidence with local officials, whom it knew to be sympathetic to the Ku Klux Klan. It was not until 1977 that one of the bombers, Robert Chambliss, was convicted of murder. In 2001, Thomas Blanton Jr. was also convicted of murder for his part in the atrocity, followed, the next year, by Bobby Frank Cherry. Cherry had claimed that he had been home watching wrestling on television the night the bomb was planted, an alibi that went unchallenged for decades until Mitchell, relying on old-fashioned research, discovered that in 1963 local stations had not televised wrestling.
The third case involves the murders of Andrew Goodman, James Chaney and Michael Schwerner on June 21, 1964. Civil rights activists, the three men were detained by the police in Mississippi on bogus charges and handed over to a gang of Klansmen, who proceeded to shoot them and bury them in a dam. A national outcry prompted President Lyndon B. Johnson to mobilize military and F.B.I. personnel in an unprecedented show of federal concern about what seemed to be, by conventional standards, a state crime. The victims’ corpses were discovered after an intense, 44-day search. Seven Klansmen, including a deputy sheriff, were convicted of federal civil rights violations in 1967, but no one was charged with homicide under state law until 2005, when a jury convicted Edgar Ray Killen of three counts of manslaughter.
After his conviction, Killen persuaded a judge to grant him freedom pending his appeal, citing among other reasons infirmities that limited his mobility. Tipped off that witnesses had seen Killen driving unassisted and even pumping his own gas, Mitchell published an exposé that prompted the judge to order Killen into custody immediately.
Mitchell’s final case is the killing of Vernon Dahmer Sr., an N.A.A.C.P. activist who fought to remove racist impediments to voting in Mississippi. On Jan. 10, 1966, a group of Klansmen threw firebombs into Dahmer’s home. Dahmer died as a result of the injuries he suffered, and four defendants were convicted of arson and murder under state law. In 1991 a district attorney considered reopening the case to try other suspects but was hampered by a lack of funds for an additional investigator. When Mitchell publicized the matter, the Mississippi Legislature appropriated money that led to a fruitful find. In 1998 prosecutors charged 72-year-old Deavours Nix with complicity in the attack. Appearing in court in a wheelchair and breathing with the aid of an oxygen tank, Nix persuaded a judge to waive a bond. But when Nix let slip in a phone call with Mitchell that he planned to play golf at a local club, Mitchell arranged for a photographer to record the outing, and, after the photos ran in The Clarion-Ledger, the judge ordered Nix jailed.
Mitchell portrays these killers’ racism unflinchingly. He quotes Byron De La Beckwith telling him that he felt “about as much compassion for the Medgar Evers family as a nigger getting run over by a streetcar in Chicago.” He notes the testimony of an ex-wife of one of the 16th Street Baptist Church bombers, who told her: “I’m sorry I killed those four girls, but at least they can’t grow up to have more niggers.” He cites a Klansman who confessed that before firebombing the Dahmer residence, the arsonists gathered at a black cemetery where one of them urinated on a grave, saying, “The only good nigger is a dead one.”
At the same time, Mitchell illuminates the racism in the broader culture that made egregious acts of Negrophobic violence imaginable and, in the minds of many onlookers, tolerable if not defensible. He recalls, for instance, a line from a stump speech by Paul Johnson Jr., the successful gubernatorial candidate in Mississippi in 1963, who asked delighted audiences: “You know what N.A.A.C.P. stands for? Niggers, apes, alligators, coons and possums.” And he notes that a prosecutor in one of Beckwith’s trials refused to address the victim’s widow as “Mrs.” Evers for fear that he might anger the jury, since, under Jim Crow, such courtesies were routinely withheld from African-Americans. That same prosecutor, Bill Waller, a future governor of the state, attempted to weed racists from the jury by asking, “Do you think it’s a crime to kill a nigger?”
Brave, bracing and instructive, “Race Against Time” is, on occasion, insufficiently probing. Mitchell repeats, and appears to believe, allegations that the F.B.I. essentially deputized a mobster to shake down a frightened Klansman for information. Yet he offers no assessment of this illegal intimidation. Nor does he, in recounting the F.B.I.’s infiltration of the Klan, alert readers to the fact that the agency was simultaneously engaged in numerous illegal encroachments on the civil liberties of other Americans, including Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. (The F.B.I. justified its intrusions on freedom of association by citing suspicion of lawbreaking, but we now know that it routinely violated the rights of individuals and groups simply because they were deemed to be ideologically obnoxious.)
Moreover, it’s inadequate to dismiss casually the dissenting opinion of three Mississippi Supreme Court justices who argued that a retrial of Byron De La Beckwith decades after his second mistrial would constitute a violation of various rights. Mitchell notes that one of the dissenting justices had been a leader of the segregationist Citizens’ Council. But what about the substance of the justice’s argument? In the retrial of Beckwith and others, were irregularities tolerated because of the obviousness of the defendant’s guilt and embarrassment over previous law-enforcement failures? If so, was such tolerance justified under the circumstances — with time running out to punish murderers before they expired?
There is more to say about what those belated prosecutions of civil-rights-era crimes accomplished beyond their partial settling of accounts for perpetrators and victims’ families.
An excellent work that can profitably be read in conjunction with “Race Against Time” is Renee C. Romano’s “Racial Reckoning: Prosecuting America’s Civil Rights Murders” (2014), which offers a rigorous assessment of the atonement prosecutions. No single book about such an expansive topic could possibly serve as a comprehensive account, and “Race Against Time” admirably assumes the heavy burden that Jerry Mitchell takes on; it warrants praise, gratitude and a wide audience.