Is It Time to Remake Our Digital Lives?
To the Editor:
Re “The Known Unknown,” by Shoshana Zuboff (Sunday Review, Jan. 26):
Ms. Zuboff warns of the dangers of surveillance capitalism. Her solution is for the government to pass new laws limiting the ability of surveillance capitalists to use the data they collect. In a perfect world, this would be a reasonable response. In the real world, with our current government, this has pretty much zero chance of success.
Here’s another idea: Delete your Facebook account. Use a search engine other than Google, and don’t use Gmail. Don’t buy anything on Amazon. Don’t use Microsoft products. Don’t allow Alexa or any other listening device into your home. Don’t install anything to make your home “smart.” And use your smartphone with a little discretion and thoughtfulness.
These are things each and every one of us can do. There are alternatives to all of the products and services provided by the dominant surveillance capitalists. If we as citizens are truly concerned about our loss of privacy and individual agency, it’s time to take a little personal responsibility for our digital lives.
Greg Rapp
Boulder, Colo.
To the Editor:
Re “Total Surveillance Is Not What America Signed Up For” (“The Privacy Project,” editorial, Jan. 26):
You say, Americans “deserve the freedom to choose a life without surveillance.” Quite so.
I have exerted that power by the simple expedient of never having acquired a smartphone, averting “addiction” to such a device, saving time for better pursuits than gazing at a tiny screen, and staying out of the vast data set your special section so frighteningly describes.
Dan Campion
Iowa City
To the Editor:
Re “Amid Tensions, U.S. Turns Away Iranian Students” (news article, Jan. 27):
I am heartsick to read about the many Iranians who were denied entry into the United States. Despite months of extensive vetting, being accepted for study, investing in airfare and leaving their jobs and homes, they were abruptly turned away and deported. This is America at its worst, not its best.
I lived in Iran for two years before the 1979 revolution. I have great love for the Iranian people and great respect for their culture. Very few Americans today have any direct experience with Iran, so it is easy to demonize the country and its people.
Neither the United States nor Iran is perfect, but both will gain from person-to-person contacts, building toward knowledge and understanding and away from preconceptions and ideology. Surely this is the wisest way to ensure our security.
Susan Payne
Cape Elizabeth, Me.
To the Editor:
Re “What to Say to Someone With Cancer” (Personal Health, Jan. 14):
Much of the advice in Jane E. Brody’s column is excellent. But some of it is confoundingly restrictive. To tell readers, for example, that a perfectly reasonable offer like “call me if you need anything” is “unhelpful or off-putting” might lead them to say nothing, and that would be a shame.
Though I have been sitting with my diagnosis for four months, it took me until today, when I finally got my first shot and took the first of the pills I will probably take every day for the rest of my life, to fully believe that cancer was happening to me. How could I possibly expect my friends and family to respond to the news in a way I find fulfilling when I hardly know how to respond myself?
Cancer is terrifying for everyone, and we need to talk about it more, not less. There will be awkward reactions and wonderful ones. So what if some reactions are clumsy? We ought to take time to educate the people we care about, and focus on those who surprise us in wonderful ways. Why invent slights where none were intended?
Anna Walker
Chappaqua, N.Y.