6 Classical Music Concerts to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘LA DAMNATION DE FAUST’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Jan. 25, 1 p.m.; Jan. 29, 8 p.m.; through Feb. 8). What was initially supposed to be a revival of Robert Lepage’s video-heavy production of this Berlioz opera is now just four concert performances, but with a fine cast all the same. Edward Gardner conducts Elina Garanca as Marguerite, Ildar Abdrazakov as Méphistophélès and two tenors sharing the role of Faust, with Bryan Hymel appearing in the first pair of shows and Michael Spyres in the second.
212-362-6000, metopera.org
‘DIARY OF ONE WHO DISAPPEARED’ AND ‘PIERROT LUNAIRE’ at the 92nd Street Y (Jan. 24, 8 p.m.). The Y’s Inflection Series continues with an extraordinary double bill of vocal works, with Janacek’s “Diary of One Who Disappeared” preceding Schoenberg’s seminal monodrama, “Pierrot Lunaire.” Benjamin Hochman is at the piano for both, with Jennifer Johnson Cano and William Ferguson singing the Janacek, and Lucy Shelton the Schoenberg.
212-415-5500, 92y.org
FOCUS FESTIVAL at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater and Alice Tully Hall (Jan. 24 and 27-31, 7:30 p.m.). Curated by Joel Sachs and Odaline de la Martinez, the 36th annual festival of new music at Juilliard focuses exclusively on female composers, with six free concerts spread over a week. Each of them has a wonderful program full of gems, but note the first, with scores by Ruth Crawford Seeger, Elisabeth Lutyens and Galina Ustvolskaya; and the last, a Juilliard Orchestra concert at Alice Tully Hall overseen by the conductor David Robertson that features music by Betsy Jolas, Grazyna Bacewicz, Ethel Smyth, Thea Musgrave and Sofia Gubaidulina.
212-799-5000, juilliard.edu
INTERNATIONAL CONTEMPORARY ENSEMBLE at Zankel Hall (Jan. 28, 7:30 p.m.). Jörg Widmann, a musician uncommonly aware of the burdens and opportunities of music past, is the holder of Carnegie Hall’s Richard and Barbara Debs Composer’s Chair this season, but he is much more than a composer. Here, he conducts and plays clarinet in a concert of his own music, from solo pieces like “Air” for horn and “Three Shadow Dances” for clarinet to ensemble works, including “Liebeslied” and “Freie Stücke.” Also in new music at Carnegie, this weekend the Kronos Quartet plays Missy Mazzoli, Steve Reich, and a Bryce Dessner premiere (Sunday, 9 p.m.).
212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
ANNE-SOPHIE MUTTER at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 30, 7 p.m.). As aristocratic as violinists come, Mutter leads an all-Beethoven program of the “Spring” and “Kreutzer” Violin Sonatas and the “Ghost” Piano Trio, for which she is joined by the cellist Daniel Müller-Schott and her longstanding accompanist, the pianist Lambert Orkis.
212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Jan. 28 and 30, 7:30 p.m.; Jan. 31, 11 a.m.). Ring in the Lunar New Year with the Philharmonic’s annual celebration on Tuesday, with Long Yu conducting a program that includes Gil Shaham as the soloist in Chen Gang and He Zhanhao’s “The Butterfly Lovers” and Haochen Zhang at the piano in Gershwin’s “Rhapsody in Blue.” Later in the coming week, Simone Young leads what we might call an all-Commonwealth program, as works by Britten and Elgar surround the Australian composer Brett Dean’s Cello Concerto. Alban Gerhardt is the soloist.
212-875-5656, nyphil.org