Adam Schiff’s Case for Conviction: A ‘Tour de Force’
To the Editor:
Re “Democrats Assert Trump Was Trying to ‘Cheat’ in ’20 Bid” (front page, Jan. 23):
The brilliant opening presentation on Tuesday by Adam Schiff, the lead House impeachment manager, should be required reading or viewing not only in high school civics classes but also in law school constitutional law and advocacy classes. It is a tour de force, framing the fundamental constitutional principles of separation of powers and its historical underpinnings, examined through the narrower prism of the events surrounding the Trump impeachment.
He presented a comprehensive and compelling recitation of the president’s breaches of the Constitution and abuse of power on a remarkable scale, which continued with equal force on Wednesday.
Mr. Schiff’s final appeal to the Senate and the American people not to accept as the new normal the executive’s flouting of the Constitution’s checks and balances, to not simply “get over it” and face the dire threat to our republican form of government, put in plain language before the jurors and the entire country the stark choice confronting us in this trial. At the end, he placed the ultimate responsibility upon, and trust in, the Senate jurors in the trial and the American people in the coming election to do the right thing.
Melvin R. Shuster
Philadelphia
To the Editor:
We are leaving out a particularly able, intelligent, articulate and tough Democrat who could really go head to head against President Trump. It’s Representative Adam Schiff. If only he would run. The Democrats could still draft him.
James Adler
Cambridge, Mass.
To the Editor:
At Davos, President Trump said: “Honestly, we have all the material. They don’t have the material.” In doing so, he openly admitted to obstruction of justice. Case closed.
Jeremy Pressman
West Hartford, Conn.
To the Editor:
Re “Whisked Away From the Stump, Senators Leave a Lane for Rivals” (front page, Jan. 23):
It seems only fair that those presidential candidates who do not have to be in attendance at President Trump’s impeachment trial cease their on-the-ground campaigning until all candidates have equal opportunity for hand shaking, baby holding, door knocking, kaffeeklatsching, etc. It would be a welcome example of solidarity in the Democratic Party.
I like to believe that we are all working toward the same end, and that is to get Mr. Trump out of the White House. Many of us really don’t care which of the Democrats ends up winning the election; we just want one of them in the Oval Office.
Helen Ogden
Pacific Grove, Calif.