What Americans Can Learn From the Chinese
When I was asked to go to China to be a judge on “Star of Outlook English Talent Competition,” I assumed I’d be joining a nerdy little program, like those on the nascent PBS a half-century ago. Something like “The Letter People,” with 26 anthropomorphic characters representing the alphabet, or “Science Demonstrations,” with a wild-haired scientist who declared, “Physics is my business.”
Nope. “Star of Outlook” says some seven million contestants, from kindergarten to college age, took part in this edition of the program and that it has had about 100 million participants since it began two decades ago. It’s a bit like “America’s Got Talent,” but it’s more than entertainment. It’s a chance for young Chinese people to speak out on important issues — and it’s a recognition of the importance of the English-speaking world. At least, for now.
I and five other American, British and Canadian judges spent a week of 12-hour days last year in Beijing evaluating 50 finalists, who gave carefully rehearsed three-minute TED-like talks, then answered questions from us. Some tried to stand out by wearing costumes (robot, karate master and empress among them).
We were looking for compelling personal stories while also considering their knowledge of English, their pronunciation, the subject matter and logic of their talk, and we adjusted for their age. As if being on national TV were not pressure enough, they faced a studio audience made up solely of their families (usually, just their mothers).
After many one-against-one elimination rounds, we named a winner: a 10-year-old girl from Guangdong Province who spoke with nearly perfect English. She talked about protecting abandoned dogs, and suggested virtual-reality glasses to help humans see the world through a dog’s eyes.
It struck me that these young men and women demonstrated why China is fast emerging as an economic, technological and even a cultural superpower — and America’s chief rival.
Yes, in a world that relies more on English, it’s less important for Americans to learn Chinese. And, yes, there are Chinese-speaking competitions in the West. But not on this scale.
An American without Chinese roots who is fluent in Chinese is rare; the number of American students learning Chinese, while growing quickly, is still in the hundreds of thousands.
By contrast, as many Chinese have studied English as there are Americans. How many can speak it well is another question, and this contest encourages kids to improve.
Indeed, this competition is also a way for parents to overcome what many perceive as a stifling education system. It encourages young Chinese to be creative and to use what they learn, said the host, Yinqi Zhao, also known as Frank, who conceived the show.
I had expected to hear pablum topics, and there were some, like a talk about what children can learn from their parents. But in fact many contestants addressed issues  delicate enough that I wondered whether censors for the increasingly authoritarian government would allow them when the show aired in November.
From what I could tell, little was removed. The kids talked about schools that emphasize rote memorization over creativity. Pressure from overbearing parents. Poverty. The heedless consumption of plastic that ends up in the ocean. And the consequences of China’s one-child policy.
Several of the contestants even talked about depression. “Seven years ago I attempted suicide,” began one 24-year-old from an impoverished village southwest of Beijing. She described studying from morning until late at night in response to the onerously high expectations of Chinese parents and society. She spoke of redemption through “self-salvation” and “reaching out.”
No one mentioned President Xi Jinping. Or the Hong Kong protests. Or oppression of the Uighurs in the west. Indeed, given the controls on the media in China, I’m not sure how much the contestants knew about these topics.
That not even the oldest contestants mentioned these subjects left me wondering, maybe naïvely: For all their progress in English, will the Chinese truly succeed without a more informed public? Speaking like an American does not mean thinking like an American.
Almost no fathers came to watch their kids, most who were under 15. When an 11-year-old son of English teachers from Ningbo, a city south of Shanghai, won his round, his mother wept with joy. She said the boy’s father wasn’t there because he couldn’t get time off from work. Most American bosses, I said, would insist an employee take time off if his child reached a national championship. The mothers said China is different.
About two-thirds of the 50 finalists were young women. Their lack of confidence struck me. Asked about becoming a heart surgeon, one teenager said the job was too difficult for women. Others played down their own skills.
And I noticed the influence of money. The polished British accents of many contestants told me they likely had tutors. Some of the children have studied or traveled abroad; one had visited 22 countries.
But not everyone got to the finals with money. The 11-year-old boy’s mother told me she and her husband didn’t earn enough to hire tutors. She said that even without tutors, the competitions — four in her city, then one in the provincial capital and then the nationals against the top 10 in his age group — had cost about $1,500. She told of one parent who had spent $75 to have her daughter’s hair braided for the finals.
The 10-year-old winner talked of a father who worked so hard he wasn’t happy and of her stressed-out 15-year-old brother. You must be true to yourself and do what you love, she said, then you will have a soul. “Without a soul,” she added, “your entire person is controlled by someone else.”
I thought this a most important message for everyone, not just the Chinese.
I teach at Stanford and was proud to hear a half-dozen of the contestants, one only 11 years old, say it was their dream university. Only a few years ago, our country would have not just welcomed such students, it would have hoped they would stay, to lift the country and the world.
If only these connections could be strengthened. Today’s most intractable global problems require cross-cultural cooperation. These formidable children would be better as our partners than our opponents.