Ken Starr, School Meals, N.F.L.: Your Friday Evening Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. President Trump has stacked his defense team for the Senate impeachment trial with high-profile litigators.
They include Ken Starr, who investigated President Bill Clinton; Alan Dershowitz, the celebrity defense lawyer and Harvard Law School professor emeritus; Robert Ray, who negotiated a final settlement with Mr. Clinton; and Pam Bondi, the former Florida attorney general. Pictured above from left to right are Mr. Starr, Ms. Bondi, Mr. Dershowitz and Mr. Ray.
The team, led by the White House counsel Pat Cipollone and Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer Jay Sekulow, faces the dual challenge of preserving the president’s support among Senate Republicans and presenting his case to the wider public.
In choosing his representation, the president in effect assembled his view of an all-star television legal team. But much of the trial is likely to unfold behind closed doors.
2. The Trump administration moved to roll back more school nutrition standards, originally championed by Michelle Obama. Food companies cheered the move.
The proposed rule by the Agriculture Department — which, adding insult to injury, came on the former first lady’s birthday — would give schools more flexibility in how much fruit is offered during breakfast and in the types of vegetables offered in meals. It would also broaden what counts as a snack. Above, Mrs. Obama in 2012.
Nutritionists condemned the change, predicting a comeback for unhealthy foods like french fries and the return of daily hamburgers.
3. With voting about to begin in the Democratic primaries and caucuses, we looked at Facebook ads to see which states candidates are betting on.
The Democratic field has spent more than $31 million on Facebook ads in the past 90 days, including $6.4 million on the first four states: Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada and South Carolina. In that time, President Trump has spent about $7.5 million on Facebook ads.
Here’s how campaigns are plotting their way through primary states.
On Sunday, The Times’s editorial board will announce its choice for the Democratic nomination on “The Weekly” on FX at 10 p.m. Nine of the candidates were interviewed by the board; the transcripts of those sessions are here.
4. A new documentary about sexual allegations against Russell Simmons was supposed to be the next high-profile media moment of the #MeToo era. But then Oprah Winfrey dropped out.
Ms. Winfrey initially said her decision to abandon the Apple film last week was a result of creative differences, but it also involved intense pressure from the hip-hop mogul and his supporters to get Ms. Winfrey to pull the plug.
In an interview with The Times, Ms. Winfrey acknowledged that Mr. Simmons, above in August, had tried to get her to pull out of the project. At issue was the account of one woman, which Ms. Winfrey said contained inconsistencies that the film had not adequately addressed.
5. Three major U.S. airports will screen passengers from a city in China where a mysterious respiratory virus has sickened dozens.
Kennedy International Airport in New York, San Francisco International and Los Angeles International will screen for the infection, which has killed two people and sickened at least 45 in China and other Asian countries, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. About 100 experts from the C.D.C. are being deployed to the three airports.
Most infected people are believed to have originally contracted the disease from exposure to animals at a seafood and meat market in Wuhan. Above, scanning in Bangkok.
6. Adam Mosseri, the head of Instagram, wants to learn from the mistakes of Facebook, its parent company — and possibly upend the influencer economy.
The company is considering how to make likes private in an effort to curb bullying and address other safety issues, and Mr. Mosseri is thinking about the larger, potentially corrosive impact of social media.
Are you panicking about the amount of time your kids spend on their phones? Take a breath: New research suggests you might actually not have that much to worry about.
7. An Austrian village wants “Frozen” fans to let it go.
Each year, one million travelers visit Hallstatt, a picturesque 16th-century hamlet some fans say inspired the fictional kingdom of Arendelle in the blockbuster Disney film (it was actually influenced by a village in far-off Norway).
To combat the influx, Hallstatt is starting a campaign that will cap tour bus visits and ask visitors to stay more than two hours, among other requirements.
Disney is doing its own kind of image-shaping. The company is dropping Fox from the 20th Century name, a move intended to keep consumers from mistakenly connecting it with the Fox News media empire.
8. A trip to Super Bowl LIV is on the line this weekend.
The 49ers host the Packers and the Chiefs host the Titans in the conference championship games on Sunday. Here are our predictions.
The 49ers’ success this season — a 13-3 record, a No. 1 seed in the playoffs and a berth in the N.F.C. championship game — is rooted in a process initiated three years ago by the team’s coach and general manager, but also in a tip from a rival.
9. “I wake up every day and say, ‘Mirror, mirror on the wall, who’s the baddest bounty hunter of them all?’”
Back in 2004, Duane Chapman, known as Dog, started a reality revolution and a new genre of TV with “Dog the Bounty Hunter.” Viewers were pulled along for eight seasons of fugitive chases as Dog led his crew, including his wife, Beth Chapman, on hot pursuits.
Ms. Chapman died of cancer last year. He has no TV contract. So what comes next? He’s weighing his options, but what he’d really like to do is be a real sheriff, in a real town. Of course, it could be filmed. “I think it’d be a hit,” he said.
10. And finally, ending the week on a sweet note.
There are those who think that less is more, but in the case of this tres leches cake, more is definitely more. Instead of stopping at the traditional three milks — sweetened condensed milk, evaporated milk, and cream — our Food columnist Melissa Clark stirs in three more. Think of it as seis leches cake.
She simmers regular coconut milk and condensed coconut milk to add a complex flavor and silky texture and finishes it off with a dulce de leche on the surface of the cake. The final result is a dense, puddinglike cake flavored with cinnamon and rum.
Hope you can indulge a little this weekend.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European, African or American morning.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.