Three Books on the Enigma That Is Modern Russia
FROM RUSSIA WITH BLOOD
The Kremlin’s Ruthless Assassination Program and Vladimir Putin’s Secret War on the West
By Heidi Blake
Illustrated. 323 pp. Mulholland. $30.
Since the start of Vladimir Putin’s confrontation with the West two decades ago, Russia’s love-hate relationship with Britain has been especially rich in symbolism. British governments have assiduously courted the Russian president despite his mounting repression at home and aggression abroad. But the hopes for a special relationship were derailed by Britain’s role as a luxurious sanctuary for powerful Putin opponents as well as other wealthy Russians seeking protection from their country’s rampant corruption and lawlessness.
Among them was Putin’s onetime main adversary Boris Berezovsky, who waged a long-running campaign to undermine his former ally by backing opposition parties, investigating corruption and funding a colorful network of Kremlin critics. Blake, BuzzFeed’s global investigations editor, tells the story of the late oligarch’s war against Putin and the Kremlin’s drive to silence him and other critics. Her gripping descriptions of intrigue and violence brim with details about the grotesque lifestyles of the über-rich — Berezovsky’s planefuls of young women and imported virility potions producing enormous headaches for the British security services tasked with protecting him.
The book is especially valuable for plotting the developments on a timeline of Russian domestic politics. When Putin opponents start dropping dead from poisonings, suspicious accidents and surprise heart attacks, the chronology is as damning as it is alarming. “Every dead body sent a signal,” Blake writes. “If you cross Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin, there is no safe place for you on earth.”
Her Berezovsky-Putin narrative does contain some minor inaccuracies. It wasn’t Berezovsky who brought the former K.G.B. officer to Moscow in the 1990s to succeed Boris Yeltsin. Neither he nor anyone else could have dreamed of Putin’s becoming president before that came to pass in 1999. Otherwise, Blake’s reporting — based on BuzzFeed investigations — helps expose the aims of a Mafia state in which the government is so intertwined with organized crime, they’re best described as a unified organization.
BETWEEN TWO FIRES
Truth, Ambition, and Compromise in Putin’s Russia
By Joshua Yaffa
356 pp. Tim Duggan. $28.
A New Yorker magazine correspondent in Moscow, Yaffa paints a deep and revealing portrait of life inside Vladimir Putin’s Russia by profiling prominent figures who have learned to navigate the regime’s increasingly strict and often arbitrary cultural and political strictures.
Subjects include a television producer steeped in Soviet-era counterculture who rises to head the main state television channel; a Crimean zookeeper whose enthusiasm for Russia’s annexation of Ukraine’s Black Sea peninsula founders under its corrupt new leaders; and a Chechen human rights activist who continues working in her traumatized region while colleagues are killed or forced out. Through them, Yaffa explores the topics of state propaganda, the Kremlin’s revisions of history and its war in eastern Ukraine.
The title of this bleak and poignant work refers to a metaphor for Russian life, of being caught between larger forces. Yaffa mines a rich vein, describing his subjects’ moral compromises and often ingenious ways of engaging a crooked bureaucracy to show how the Kremlin sustains its authoritarianism. Not only are corruption and violence employed to keep the populace in line; so too are the self-deceptions of the Russians themselves, who are manipulated through an ideological pastiche of nationalist, religious and cultural values.
Yaffa draws on Soviet and czarist history and literature to describe the persistence of a national archetype — the “wily man,” as a leading sociologist puts it — shaped by the need to survive through adaptation to a repressive system. The book glosses over some of the fundamental reforms of the 1990s, which ended when Putin came to power. But the calculus of compromise Yaffa describes enables him to get to the heart of how the current regime has returned Russia to its traditional political culture.
In the end, Yaffa writes, “for the logic of compromise to work, both parties have to hold up their end of the bargain.” However, as the Putin system becomes ever more authoritarian, “the cost of wiliness goes up ever more, and its benefits become less and less.”
PRAVDA HA HA
True Travels to the End of Europe
By Rory MacLean
343 pp. Bloomsbury. $27.
Three decades after journeying across the crumbling Soviet bloc in heady 1989, the year the Berlin Wall came down, the travel writer MacLean retraces his route in reverse to explore what’s behind the nationalist sentiment driving the resurgence of authoritarianism across the continent. Wending his way west from Russia — where he captures a sense of its nihilistic excess and colossal disparities, if somewhat in caricature — he describes the desolation of former Communist states on its periphery and disappointed expectations fueling historical amnesia from Eastern Europe to Britain.
Recounted in poetic prose with context from pop-history and cultural commentary, MacLean’s picaresque adventures include poignant reunions and chance encounters with a colorful cast of characters ranging from intellectuals to proletarians, tycoons to destitute migrants. They take place under the menacing shadow of Russia’s escalating attacks on Western liberal democracy and the revisionist mythologizing of right-wing leaders across the continent.
MacLean is a sympathetic and perceptive guide, his characters memorable partly for confirming and sometimes subverting stereotypes. In Russia, he meets a bribe-seeking cop who takes pity on him and a social media troll who doesn’t apologize for spreading disinformation abroad despite disappointment in her own country. He also profiles new dissidents campaigning for open societies.
The episodes evoke a compelling sense of place, from the spiritual emptiness of the Russian Baltic Sea exclave Kaliningrad to the absurdity of Moldova’s impoverished breakaway region Transnistria, largely run by a sprawling private company — a “state within a nonstate,” MacLean calls it. Some of his most lyrical writing describes Hungary, where Prime Minister Viktor Orban is manufacturing a collective sense of victimhood to help weaponize the unrealized optimism of the 1990s. An admiring homeless alcoholic in Budapest tells him “Europe is dead.”