The Truth About Harvey Weinstein’s Walker
Harvey Weinstein’s walker is playing a featured role at his trial. The decrepit-looking Mr. Weinstein, body hunched as he slowly rolls forward, contrasts sharply with his former image as a domineering Hollywood power broker now accused of rape and predatory sexual assault.
Whether Mr. Weinstein needs a walker or the assistance of aides to help him in court because of recent back surgery, as his lawyers claim, is beyond the point. Seeing him lean on the walker or appear to struggle without it does more than just capture attention. The image creates impressions and can reinforce prejudices.
To the judge, jurors, lawyers, reporters and onlookers the walker conveys an image, accurate or not, of physical weakness and dependence — what I call the “the aesthetics of disability.” These physical and behavioral markers of disability produce visceral responses in jurors and the public that can lead them to be more (or less) sympathetic when weighing a defendant’s liability, public responsibility and, in the end, punishment.
Disability aesthetics play a critical role in jury deliberations because, unlike race, gender, socioeconomic status or sexuality, people believe disability is fundamentally different and warrants differential treatment. Jurors swear an oath to decide the facts given to them based on the evidence presented. They also rely on their “common base of knowledge and experience,” as one court put it, to judge the credibility and persuasiveness of witness testimony.
But their common base of knowledge and experience about disability is at best incomplete or inaccurate, and so, by default, jurors will rely on a flawed set of beliefs when they see victims and defendants who appear in someway disabled. While wheelchairs, walkers and other mobility devices are often associated with dependence, many people use them to achieve greater freedom of movement and overall independence.
Studies have shown that when jurors perceive a victim in a sexual assault case as a person with a disability, they are more likely to believe the victim and punish the defendant. Other research suggests a defendant’s intellectual or developmental disability might lead jurors to discount liability. Similarly, research indicates that jurors are likely to be more lenient in assigning liability and punishment when a defendant is or appears to be 50 or older. In this sense, both age and disability status neutralize or offset juror and public perceptions of danger and risk.
Like the Weinstein trial, other high-profile cases have raised similar issues about the aesthetics of disability. Paul Manafort, the former Trump campaign chairman, and Robert Gregory Bowers, charged in the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting, each appeared in court in wheelchairs. So did Joseph James DeAngelo, the so-called Golden State Killer, who also seemed to struggle to speak above a whisper — an image that was wholly inconsistent with the man neighbors described as boisterous and “fit.”
So why should we care about what, in some cases, is a strategic use of this aesthetic in court? Criminal trials are performances, after all, with high stakes and lawyers squaring off in an adversarial system where their duties are to zealously represent their clients.
We should care because the aesthetics of disability can be used to manipulate the legal system while also reinforcing stereotypes of what people with disabilities look and sound like, and what they are capable of doing.
For people with obvious disabilities, societal expectations remain limited, as explicit and implicit biases may affect hiring decisions; access to quality education; decisions about sexual intimacy, marriage, and parenting without court interference; voting and jury service; and even immigration status. Scholars have studied the “spread effect” — how one visible impairment gets transferred to all aspects of a person’s ability. It is why wheelchair users are sometimes presumed to be cognitively impaired even though the ability to walk has absolutely nothing to do with mental capacity.
These biases also affect people whose disabilities may be less visible or obvious and whose claims to disability are questioned because they do not match existing stereotypes. This can deny them access to legally mandated reasonable accommodations, critical health care and social supports necessary for meaningful integration in employment, for example.
In the end, Mr. Weinstein may very well be in a state of deteriorating health. Or the truth might be that he, like many others before him, will hope the benefit of disability aesthetics will help him in the courtroom. But the aggregate effect of this litigation strategy has ripple effects we have not yet wrestled with or connected to broader anti-discrimination efforts.