The American People Are Being Scammed by Mitch McConnell
The removal of a sitting president is the last line of defense provided by the framers of the Constitution against the abuse of power by the leader of our country. When senators take an oath to uphold the Constitution, they assume the grave responsibility to conduct a thorough and fair trial on behalf of the American people.
Dismissing this process set out in the Constitution, President Trump has called the impeachment process a “scam.” That’s his opinion, of course — but this week Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is doing everything he can to ensure that the Senate trial actually is a scam.
An impeachment trial is only meaningful if the American people can have confidence in the fairness of the process; only then will the trial’s verdict be worthy of respect. Mr. McConnell is advocating trial procedures that would undercut any possibility of that.
Americans understand the basic contours of a fair trial: Each side presents relevant evidence, in the form of documents and witnesses. But Mr. McConnell and President Trump’s allies in the Senate appear to think that the president should be allowed to play by his own rules. The impeachment procedural resolution that the Senate adopted early Wednesday morning appears designed to, among other things, prevent either side from introducing testimony and evidence about President Trump’s alleged abuse of power and obstruction of Congress.
It could have been worse. Under intense pressure, including from members of his own party, Mr. McConnell slightly modified some of the most extreme provisions. The current version expands the time for the parties to present their cases to three days from two, and it allows the admission of evidence developed in the House — although the president may still object to evidence on any basis.
Mr. McConnell’s rules will weaken the power of impeachment as a deterrent to presidential misbehavior by, among other things, permitting the Senate to reject evidence and testimony that the House has already collected and that was not previously under dispute. In the worst case scenario, the rule could have the effect of allowing the Senate to dismiss the House’s evidence entirely. And these rules add new, unprecedented roadblocks to the Senate’s receiving witness testimony — including from witnesses who have already provided sworn statements to the House, some at great personal and professional cost.
Every impeachment trial in American history has heard from fact witnesses. And at least every impeachment trial in the last hundred years has heard fact testimony from new witnesses — those who have not previously provided evidence to the House of Representatives. Breaking from this ironclad precedent to protect President Trump, Mr. McConnell’s rules provide no assurance that the Senate will hear from witnesses or collect evidence.
Finally, Mr. McConnell’s proposal would allow senators to make a motion to dismiss at any time. Under a motion to dismiss, a defendant argues that, even if everything the prosecution alleges were true, the defendant still did nothing wrong. If such a motion were to pass before evidence is introduced, the Senate would effectively endorse the president’s conduct toward Ukraine without doing even the most basic fact-finding to determine the truth of the matter.
What happens next is not just for Mr. McConnell to decide. Each senator can uphold his or her constitutional duty and vote in the coming weeks, as they should have voted yesterday, to ensure that they have the information they need to decide whether the president solicited a foreign power’s assistance in his re-election and tried to prevent Congress from investigating that conduct, and whether that conduct necessitates his removal from office.
The president’s allies in the Senate must ask themselves whether they would brush aside such serious allegations if someone else was occupying the White House. One suspects that they would react very differently if, for instance, President Barack Obama had been accused of asking a foreign government to investigate Mitt Romney.
The American people want their senators to engage in a serious quest for the truth. A recent CNN poll of voters showed that 69 percent of Americans want the Senate to hear evidence and witnesses in the coming days.
As I watched from the Senate gallery Tuesday, the gravity of the moment was palpable. For many senators, the coming days and weeks will see the most consequential votes of their lives. They are being given a stark choice: do what is right for the nation or do what is politically expedient for the most corrupt president in American history. History will be decided on their watch. We know what the founders intended them to do in this situation. But only these 100 senators can decide whether they can live up to that standard.