What’s on TV Sunday: ‘The Outsider’ and ‘Sanditon’
THE OUTSIDER 9 p.m. on HBO; stream on HBO platforms. This new dark drama series reinvents the 2018 Stephen King novel of the same name, to thrilling effect. The show starts out with an investigation into a boy’s murder in small-town Georgia. The cop on the case, Ralph (Ben Mendelsohn), and a private investigator, Holly (Cynthia Erivo), find clear-cut evidence against a local Little League coach named Terry (Jason Bateman, who also directed the first two episodes). Then they discover evidence that shows Terry was in two places at once the night of the murder. Frustrated with the contradiction, Ralph isn’t willing to look into the unexplainable. Yet Holly urges him to keep an open mind if they want to get to the bottom of the murder. The one factor that may convince Ralph to see beyond cold hard facts is that he just lost his son and is looking for answers of his own.
THE 25TH ANNUAL CRITICS’ CHOICE AWARDS 7 p.m. on CW. Taye Diggs hosts this annual awards show, broadcast live from Santa Monica. Among the strong contenders chosen by the Critics Choice Association are “The Irishman,” with 14 nominations, “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood,” with 12, and “Little Women,” which racked up 9.
SANDITON 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). The screenwriter Andrew Davies took many liberties with Jane Austen’s final, incomplete novel. The result is this eight-part “Masterpiece” series, starring Rose Williams as our protagonist Charlotte Heywood. At the outset, Charlotte leaves her home for Sanditon, a fishing village that the entrepreneurial Parker family wants to transform into a resort town. When Charlotte meets her host’s brother, the handsome and slightly misbehaved Sidney (Theo James), the two initially clash but slowly find common ground. One thing to know before diving into this remake: While it contains familiar nuggets of Austen’s writing, it’s wildly scandalous compared to her completed novels. “There is a lot of implied sexual energy and humor in Austen,” Williams said in an interview in The New York Times. Davies, she added, “kind of pulls it out and makes it visual.”
LITTLE MEN (2016) Stream on Hulu or Netflix; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. Not to be confused or associated with Louisa May Alcott’s “Little Women,” this touching drama directed by Ira Sachs follows the budding friendship of two middle schoolers, Jake (Theo Taplitz) and Tony (Michael Barbieri). When Jake’s grandfather dies, his family moves into his home in Brooklyn. Tony’s single mother runs a shop in the same building, and the boys meet and bond instantly. But when Jake’s father, Brian (Greg Kinnear), a struggling actor, learns his father had been charging Tony’s mother low rent for the store, he demands more money and sets off a feud that pits Tony and Jake against their parents.