Sofia Kenin Upsets Ashleigh Barty to Reach Australian Open Final
MELBOURNE, Australia — This country’s biggest hopes in decades for a homegrown Australian Open singles champion ended in the semifinals on Thursday when top-seeded Ashleigh Barty lost to an American, Sofia Kenin, 7-6 (6), 7-5.
In the final on Saturday, Kenin, the 14th seed, will face unseeded Garbiñe Muguruza, who pulled off the second upset of the day with a 7-6 (8), 7-5 win over fourth-seeded Simona Halep.
Of course, surprises have been the norm in women’s tennis in recent years. Saturday’s final will be the fourth consecutive women’s Grand Slam final without a player that was seeded in the top five.
Kenin, 21, who was born in Moscow, had not advanced past the fourth round at a Grand Slam in her 11 main draw appearances before this tournament. She did not face a seeded player here before meeting Barty, who was not only the No. 1 seed, but also the face of the tournament, carrying expectations of a host country that has gone longer without a homegrown Grand Slam singles champion than any other Grand Slam host country.
Barty, 23, was attempting to become the first Australian woman to reach the final here since Wendy Turnbull in 1980 and the first to win the title since Chris O’Neil in 1978. Among the Australian men, the last singles champion at the Australian Open was Mark Edmondson in 1976.
That was in an era in which nearly all of the top international players skipped the tournament, which routinely drew a limited field, in part because it was held in December, often over Christmas. Starting in the 1980s, the tournament’s stature grew, and the parade of homegrown champions ended.
In defeat, Barty insisted, as she had throughout the tournament, that she was undaunted by external pressures.
“I’ve just tried to go about my business the same every single day; it’s regardless of whether I was 50 in the world or 100 or 1 in the world,” she said.
Barty and Kenin were familiar with each other’s games, having met four times last season. Kenin won only one of those matches, but Alex Kenin, her father and coach, said he had a strategic breakthrough when he reviewed video of Barty’s earlier matches at this tournament.
“Barty is a great player, and she was changing her game and everything was very hard and she came up with great shots, but that basic plan we developed, we stuck to it, and it looked like it worked,” Alex Kenin said. Kenin seemed to find particular success targeting Barty’s backhand, on which the Australian made 18 unforced errors and only four winners.
“I didn’t feel supercomfortable,” Barty said. “I felt like my first plan wasn’t working. I couldn’t execute the way that I wanted. I tried to go to B and C.”
Barty also landed only half of her first serves. Still, she nearly won anyway.
“I’m two points away from winning that in straight sets, which is disappointing,” Barty said. “Knowing I had to fight and scrap, I still gave myself a chance to win the match.”
Alex Kenin moved to the United States in 1987, but traveled back and forth to Russia in the years after. Sofia was born in Moscow in 1998, and moved to Florida full time as a young child.
Her results have improved rapidly in recent years — she was ranked outside the top 100 just two years ago — but she has flown under the radar, largely staying in the shadow of other American women such as Serena and Venus Williams; the 15-year-old prodigy Coco Gauff; 10th-ranked Madison Keys; and the 2017 United States Open champion, Sloane Stephens.
Jessica Pegula, another American player, wrote on Twitter after Kenin’s victory that she was “finally getting the recognition she deserves,” something Kenin said was satisfying.
“People haven’t really paid attention much to me in the past,” Kenin said Thursday. “I had to establish myself, and I have. Of course, now I’m getting the attention. I like it, not going to lie.”
Muguruza, like Kenin, nearly lost both sets she played on Thursday. She saved two set points during the tiebreaker in the first set, once by prevailing in a 20-shot rally. Halep, a Romanian, served for the second set and nearly took it, but Muguruza, a Spaniard, broke and then broke again to end the match in straight sets, if not straightforward ones.
“To lose like this hurts more, definitely,” Halep said. “I’m in pain now, I have to admit. But life is going on. I think maybe I could be a little bit more brave in the points that were important. I didn’t do that.”
Muguruza, ranked 32nd, is the first unseeded finalist here in 10 years, since Justine Henin in 2010. But like Henin, who was then a seven-time Grand Slam champion coming back from retirement, Muguruza is a known quantity.
Tennis observers expressed renewed optimism for Muguruza in the off-season after she reunited with Conchita Martinez, under whose watchful eye she won her most recent Grand Slam title, Wimbledon in 2017.
Kenin won her only previous match against Muguruza in October, 6-0, 2-6, 6-0, in the second round of the China Open in Beijing, but Muguruza has radiated a renewed ruthlessness in this tournament. After carrying an illness into the first round and losing the opening set, 6-0, she has defeated three top-10 players, all in straight sets. After beating Halep, she did not crack a smile; her objective here is not yet complete.
“Definitely the mission is to get away from here with a big trophy,” she said.