Jennifer Dulos Killing: Suspect May Have Dug Grave at Gun Club
STAMFORD, Conn. — Nearly eight months after Jennifer Dulos, a mother of five from an affluent Connecticut suburb, was reported missing, the authorities revealed a chilling new detail in the case.
A friend of Ms. Dulos’s estranged husband, who is now charged with her murder, may have dug a six-foot-long hole that was described as “100 percent a human grave” by someone who saw it.
Ms. Dulos’s body has never been discovered, and the authorities did not find any remains near what they thought might have been a grave.
But the disclosure was detailed as three people now charged in connection to her death appeared in court on Wednesday.
Two of them — Ms. Dulos’s estranged husband, Fotis, 52, and his girlfriend, Michelle C. Troconis, 44 — had long been the focus of an investigation that had law-enforcement agencies dispatching helicopters, drones and cadaver dogs across Connecticut.
The third was someone relatively new to the high-profile case: Kent D. Mawhinney, 54, the friend of Mr. Dulos who previously served as his lawyer.
All three were arrested on Tuesday, with the state police releasing warrants that offered a more detailed account of what investigators believe took place on and around the time Ms. Dulos went missing.
While much of the information in the warrants had previously been disclosed, they marked the first time that the authorities detailed the involvement of Mr. Mawhinney, who was charged with conspiracy to commit murder.
In the warrants, the police suggested that Mr. Mawhinney helped provide what they say was a false alibi to Mr. Dulos, who has been charged with murder and kidnapping. They also linked Mr. Mawhinney to that potential grave site.
The police said they had searched for human remains at a hole found at the Windsor Rod and Gun Club in East Granby, Conn., which Mr. Mawhinney helped establish.
A member of the club told the authorities that not long before Ms. Dulos went missing he spotted a hole at the club that was about 6 feet long and 3 and ½ feet deep that had lime and a tarp inside it. The club member described it as “100 percent a human grave,” according to the warrant.
In June, he went back and discovered that the hole was covered and filled.
The police searched the hole and the area around it in August, but they never found human remains, signs of the tarp or of lime. However they reviewed cellphone data that showed that Mr. Mawhinney’s phone had been used near the gun club on March 29 and again at about 11 p.m. on May 31, a week after Ms. Dulos’s disappearance.
Court documents in previous cases also suggested further links between Mr. Dulos and Mr. Mawhinney, with Mr. Mawhinney’s estranged wife telling the police that she thought Mr. Dulos was working “to get rid of her” on her husband’s behalf.
Mr. Mawhinney, in a long white T-shirt and khaki-colored pants, did not speak during the hearing in State Superior Court. He was ordered held on a $2 million bond.
Neither Mr. Mawhinney’s lawyer, Jeremy Donnelly, nor state prosecutors offered any new revelations about his connection with Mr. Dulos.
The allegation from Mr. Mawhinney’s wife came in a criminal case from last July. According to court documents from that case, officials accused Mr. Mawhinney of violating a protective order filed by his wife, with whom he is in the midst of a contentious divorce.
The woman, who was not identified, told the police that Mr. Dulos called her several times in the days before Ms. Dulos disappeared, the documents said. Mr. Dulos invited her to several meetings, including one at his home, in what he claimed was an attempt to facilitate a reconciliation between Mr. Mawhinney and his wife, according to the documents.
In June, after Ms. Dulos disappeared, the woman told the state police that she was concerned about Mr. Dulos’s growing interest in her marital woes, and that she thought she was “being ‘baited,’” according to a court document.
“She stated that she believed Dulos was ‘indebted’ to Mawhinney and that she believed Dulos was working on behalf of Mawhinney to get rid of her,” the document said. “She stated that she believed that Mawhinney wanted her dead.”
Mr. Mawhinney has pleaded not guilty in that case, and Mr. Dulos’s lawyer has denied the wife’s claims.
Her remarks echoed concerns expressed by Ms. Dulos about her husband over the course of their bitter, drawn-out divorce battle that began in 2017.
By the time Ms. Dulos went missing, the custody case involved hundreds of court filings that depicted the Dulos’s marriage as toxic and turbulent.
When she filed for divorce, Ms. Dulos said she worried that Mr. Dulos might harm her or their five children. As the case dragged on, her fears seemed to grow.
Ms. Dulos was last seen dropping her children off at a school near her house in suburban New Canaan, Conn., at around 8 a.m. on May 24. Her loved ones grew concerned hours later after she did not respond to text messages and missed scheduled appointments, according to court documents.
When the police went to Ms. Dulos’s home that evening, they discovered blood stains and spatters that led them to conclude that she had been attacked. Her car was found abandoned at a park about three miles away.
Detectives later discovered Ms. Dulos’s blood mixed with Mr. Dulos’s DNA on a faucet, as well as on the inside knob of the door to her mudroom, according to arrest warrants. They also said they found evidence of an attempt to clean up the scene.
Cellphone records and surveillance footage showed that on the same evening, Mr. Dulos and Ms. Troconis drove to Hartford, where they dumped trash bags filled with evidence, according to arrest warrants.
The police recovered several of the items, including a kitchen sponge, a clear poncho and zip-ties that all contained Ms. Dulos’s blood or traces of her DNA, according to warrants.
Officials charged Mr. Dulos and Ms. Troconis with hindering prosecution and tampering with evidence in June. They later added a second evidence tampering charge in September.
Mr. Dulos’s lawyers have repeatedly denied his involvement in Ms. Dulos’s disappearance. Both he and Ms. Troconis have pleaded not guilty to previous charges against them.
On Wednesday, one of Mr. Dulos’s lawyers, Norm Pattis, said that the case was muddled and that prosecutors were “groping in the dark” and “grasping at straws.”
So far, investigators have not resolved two fundamental questions at the heart of Ms. Dulos’s disappearance: how she was killed and what has happened to her remains.
The warrants issued this week, based largely on DNA and circumstantial evidence, partially addressed those questions; the police cite Connecticut’s chief medical examiner in saying that the evidence suggested that Ms. Dulos suffered “non-survivable injuries.”
On Wednesday, Mr. Pattis confirmed a report in the Hartford Courant that said the police were analyzing an ax taken from Mr. Dulos’s home, though he said he did not think it was significant.
In arrest warrants, the police described many incidents in which they suggested that Mr. Dulos was trying to cover his tracks with the help of Mr. Mawhinney and Ms. Troconis.
Among them were handwritten documents found at Mr. Dulos’s home that purported to show Mr. Dulos and Ms. Troconis’s whereabouts on May 24. Though Ms. Troconis initially gave the police an account of her day that hewed closely to the documents, she later admitted the pages contained events that never took place, according to warrants.
Mr. Mawhinney was named on at least one of the alibi scripts, the warrant said. Ms. Troconis said that he was present in Mr. Dulos’s home in Farmington on the morning that Ms. Dulos disappeared.
Mr. Mawhinney initially denied being there, but cellphone records placed him there, according to the warrant. He later admitted to investigators that he had been there.
The warrant said that Mr. Mawhinney also told the police that he did not speak to Mr. Dulos on the day of the apparent murder. Mr. Dulos’s phone records showed a call to Mr. Mawhinney that evening.
In court on Wednesday, Mr. Mawhinney’s lawyer said that his client is a father of two, a youth hockey coach and a longtime immigration lawyer.
If Mr. Mawhinney posts bond, he will be required to wear a GPS monitor and will be held under house arrest.
Ms. Troconis, who was also charged with conspiracy to commit murder, was ordered held on a $1.5 million bond under similar conditions.
Mr. Dulos, who appeared in court in a sport coat and jeans, was held on a $6 million bond. He posted bond and was released from custody on Thursday afternoon.
In addition to monitoring and house arrest, Judge John Blawie ordered Mr. Dulos not to contact his children, who are in the custody of Ms. Dulos’s mother.