What the Iowa Caucuses Mean for California
Good morning.
(If you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox, here’s the sign-up.)
It’s voting day in California!
Well, sort of. Today is the day county officials will start sending out mail-in ballots to voters who have requested them. So, if you’ve already asked for a mail-in ballot, you should find it at your doorstep by the end of this week.
And that means the political fun is just beginning. Presidential hopefuls are already blanketing television airwaves, and campaign mailers are arriving by the dozens. But expect that to only increase in the lead-up to the official voting day in California, also known as Super Tuesday, on March 3.
Tonight is also the first-in-the-nation Iowa caucuses and what happens there will inevitably affect what happens in California. Pay attention especially to how well Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Bernie Sanders do tonight. If either manages to win both Iowa and New Hampshire, which votes next week, it may spell the beginning of the end to primary season.
But California is something of a firewall for both campaigns, and if the results are more mixed, both candidates will most likely devote far more attention to the state. And if Elizabeth Warren or Pete Buttigieg surge tonight? Expect them to come stomping here, too.
And while the rest of the candidates focus on Iowa, Michael Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City, is making his way through California today to boost his unconventional campaign.
Just as we’ve done for the last several months, we’ll be here to guide you through the process and report on the ground in California, which has more delegates than any other state in the nation.
Are there issues you’re still confused about? Details you want to know? Get in touch, and we’ll bring you the answers. (And send tips, too.)
Now, some deadlines California voters need to know:
Still want a mail-in ballot for the primary? You have until Feb. 25 to request one through your county’s registrar of voters. (Unsure? Check your voter registration status here.)
Looking to register as a Republican to vote in the closed primary? Do so by Feb. 18.
Feb. 18 is also the deadline to register to vote. But if you procrastinate and blow past that deadline, do not fret. California now allows for same-day voter registration, which means any would-be voter can show up at a local polling place on March 3, register to vote and cast a ballot. The same goes for mailing in ballots — as long as they are postmarked by March 3 and received by March 6, they will be counted in the election.
Which brings us to another important point: Just because the primary is March 3 does not mean one candidate will be able to declare victory in California. Election Day is when we cast our ballots, but it is not necessarily when we find out who wins.
With voting laws to encourage more participation, the Secretary of State is cautioning, as it has for years, that it may take several days to count all the ballots. That, officials say, is a feature of the system, not a flaw.
In 2018, the results of some congressional races were unclear for several days — so much so that it was unclear which candidate should attend the freshman orientation in the House of Representatives.
The big question on primary night is which presidential hopeful secures the biggest share of California’s 415 Democratic delegates — 10 times the number of Iowa. When we know the answer to that question could depend on just how many of the state’s voters cast their ballots before March 3.
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
The Kansas City Chiefs claimed their first Super Bowl victory in 50 years after making a stunning fourth-quarter comeback, with quarterback Patrick Mahomes leading the team to a 31-20 victory over the San Francisco 49ers.
The Chiefs entered the fourth quarter trailing by 10 points but scored three touchdowns in roughly five minutes of the final quarter, overwhelming San Francisco’s defense. Mahomes, 24, became the youngest player named Super Bowl most valuable player. “I really wasn’t playing too well there in the third quarter and a little bit beyond that,” Mahomes said. “But the guys stuck with me. We don’t really back down there. We just kept firing away.”
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.