Picture Books That Set a Child’s Imagination Free
BEDTIME FOR SWEET CREATURES
Written by Nikki Grimes. Illustrated by Elizabeth Zunon.
Grimes and Zunon capture the time-for-bed dance with verve, imagination and empathy in this tale of a not-sleepy child and her creative appeals to stay up longer. The affectionate mom evokes a range of animals to help her cause: “Your eyes swell, wide as owls. … ‘Who? Who?’ you ask as if you didn’t know,” she says. On each lovely page, Zunon collages realistic images of the family alongside fanciful, mythical-looking animals. With its refreshing ending — the girl ends up in her parents’ bed, as so many children do — this one has the feel of an all-time great bedtime picture book.
32 pp. Sourcebooks Jabberwocky. $17.99. (Ages 3 to 7.)

YOU LOVES EWE!
By Cece Bell
Ah, the English language: Learning its quirks is a challenge for little readers and almost-readers, but Bell (“El Deafo”) brings irresistible humor to the task. This follow-up to “I Yam a Donkey!” again focuses on homonyms, with the yam and donkey, fancifully drawn with thick outlines, joined by a ewe. Once again, with shades of Abbott and Costello, the comedy really lifts off. “YOU are not a lady sheep — EWE is!” the frustrated yam shouts. But spirits are lifted by a smitten ram who has a proposal for Ewe. “EYE DEW,” she replies, as the crowd tears up.
32 pp. Clarion/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $17.99. (Ages 4 to 7.)

THE OLD TRUCK
By Jarrett Pumphrey and Jerome Pumphrey
This charming debut is by brothers who divide the writing and the art, which mixes ink-stamping and digital techniques in a glorious sunshine-washed palette. It’s a simple, beautifully constructed story about continuity and ingenuity: A beloved truck works hard for a family of farmers, including a girl who dreams of the truck as an airplane and a rocket ship. As the truck ages, it’s left to languish next to the barn. The girl grows up, takes over the farm and restores the truck, putting it back into service: a sustainable choice! The Pumphreys have created a book that’s both timeless and au courant.
48 pp. Norton Young Readers. $17.95. (Ages 4 to 8.)


THE LIZARD
Written by José Saramago. Illustrated by J. Borges. Translated by Nick Caistor and Lucia Caistor.
This memorable fable about the arrival of a giant, fork-tongued but seemingly harmless lizard artfully combines the mythmaking sensibilities of the Portuguese Nobel laureate Saramago and the Brazilian artist Borges. The mysterious lizard shows up in an ordinary town, and “panic filled the air.” As forces gather to attack it, the creature is transformed into a rose, possibly by fairies. The winsome language and striking woodcut art in bold colors and lots of black capture the ominous rush to judgment and the sweet possibility of wonderment.
24 pp. Triangle Square/Seven Stories. $17.95. (Ages 4 to 8.)

HONEYBEE: The Busy Life of Apis Mellifera
Written by Candace Fleming. Illustrated by Eric Rohmann.
Fleming and Rohmann, the team behind “Giant Squid,” offer a fascinating up-close view of the stages of a honeybee’s life. We see our little worker bee go from tiny and gray to full grown and — in a spectacular four-page gatefold — flying for the first time, all the way to the moment on her 35th day when she “drops to the ground” and “stills.” The drama and suspense are positively riveting.
40 pp. Neal Porter/Holiday House. $18.99. (Ages 6 to 9.)

FACTS VS. OPINIONS VS. ROBOTS
By Michael Rex
The question that begins this clever book full of different-colored robots could not be more timely: “Do you know the difference between a fact and an opinion?” Rex walks us through the basics with questions like “Is there a green robot?” and “Which of these robots is the most fun?” Bonus concept: When it’s hard to make a decision, “we WAIT until we have more information.” Wouldn’t it be great if grown-ups read the book as a refresher?
32 pp. Nancy Paulsen/Penguin. $17.99. (Ages 5 to 8.)

PACKS: Strength in NumbersBy Hannah Salyer
Showing how different animals benefit from living and working in groups, Salyer’s debut is a great example of the inventiveness possible in a nonfiction picture book. After a refrain of “Together…” we learn how ants harvest their food and zebras confuse predators. It all culminates, brilliantly, in an image of humans — who sometimes need reminding that “we are better” together.
48 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $17.99. (Ages 4 to 7.)

WILD HONEY FROM THE MOON
By Kenneth Kraegel
Kraegel’s (“Green Pants”) warm, offbeat tale is divided into seven chapters, great for parsing out over a week’s bedtime reading. A mother shrew and her sick son, Hugo, live in a treehouse in the woods. She reads that “one teaspoon of wild honey from the moon has been known to cure” his ailment and sets off, braving a stampede of “night mares,” getting a lift from a butterfly, and more. The enchantment and adventure just keep multiplying.
58 pp. Candlewick. $17.99. (Ages 4 to 8.)