Pete Buttigieg, Coronavirus, Tesla: Your Wednesday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Preliminary results from the Iowa caucuses show Pete Buttigieg with a narrow lead over Bernie Sanders at the top of the Democratic primary field. As of 11:30 p.m. in Iowa, or 5:30 a.m. Wednesday in London, it was unclear when the full results would be released.
Here’s what we know so far.
Most of the Democratic candidates are now barreling toward the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 11. One prominent exception is Michael Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor, who is skipping the first four nominating contests but aggressively contesting larger states that begin voting in March.
Details: The Iowa votes counted so far reflect 71 percent of the precincts and are relatively representative of the state. But the margin between Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders — 26.8 percent and 25.2 percent, respectively, of the state’s delegate equivalents — is unusually slim.
Background: After a razor-close finish in Iowa between Hillary Clinton and Mr. Sanders in 2016, new standards this year required officials to submit three numbers — rather than one — from each of the state’s 1,600-plus precincts. That change, and a new app, slowed the reporting of results.
Go deeper: The app had been designed to help Democrats to match the Republicans’ prowess in digital advertising. Its misfires raise new questions about how the party hopes to compete with the Trump campaign in the presidential election.
The United States has begun its second airlift of American citizens out of China, and Britain and France have urged their citizens to leave the country if they can.
Here’s the latest on a coronavirus outbreak that has killed at least 490 people, primarily in the Chinese province of Hubei, and sickened more than 20,000 in Asia.
The epidemic is disrupting life and business across the globe. On Tuesday, the South Korean carmaker Hyundai said it had idled factories because of Chinese supply-chain problems; Japan said it had quarantined a cruise ship with 3,700 people aboard because a passenger had tested positive for the virus; and Macau, a gambling hub and semiautonomous Chinese enclave, said it would shut its casinos for two weeks.
Quotable: “It’s heartbreaking,” says Zhang Lei, a cabdriver who volunteers to ferry residents, especially older adults, to grocery stores and hospitals in Wuhan, the epicenter of the outbreak. “There is no one to take care of them.”
On Twitter: The Times correspondents Amy Qin and Chris Buckley are our eyes and ears in Wuhan, the provincial capital of Hubei.
Visuals: Our maps track where the virus has spread, and drone footage shows Wuhan, a city of 11 million people, looking unusually quiet and desolate.
Analysis: Our columnist Li Yuan writes that the Chinese government’s response to the crisis offers its 1.4 billion people “a rare glimpse of how China’s giant, opaque bureaucratic system works — or, rather, how it fails to work.”
On the eve of a vote that will almost certainly acquit him of impeachment charges, President Trump used a major speech to claim credit for a “great American comeback” and define the coming presidential election as a battle to stop the rise of socialism in the United States. Here’s a roundup of our coverage and six takeaways from the night.
In the annual State of the Union address, Mr. Trump argued against Democratic plans to expand access to health care and praised his own tax cuts and the American drone strike that killed a senior Iranian commander, among other subjects.
The president also sprinkled the evening with dramatic flourishes — an army sergeant surprising his family in the House chamber, for example — that evoked his days as a reality television star.
Quote of note: “In just three short years, we have shattered the mentality of American decline and we have rejected the downsizing of America’s destiny,” Mr. Trump told Congress, speaking in the same House chamber where he was impeached nearly seven weeks ago.
Mutual snubs: In a decidedly chilly exchange, Mr. Trump declined to shake the hand of Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who then introduced him in a perfunctory way that eschewed the more florid language that she and other speakers have used in the past. She later ripped up her copy of his speech.
Notable guest: Juan Guaidó, the Venezuelan opposition leader, sat in Mr. Trump’s guest box. It was America’s most visible show of support yet for Mr. Guaidó, who is fighting to oust his country’s president from power.
As antigovernment protests continue in Lebanon, many Shiites in the country are struggling to square their loyalty to Hezbollah with its support for the status quo: a government that cannot offer 24-hour electricity, much less a functional economy.
Hezbollah, an Islamist militia that has propped up the government’s incompetence since entering Lebanese politics in 2005, also faces a choice: Will it keep trying to smother demonstrations by Shiites, or listen to their economic grievances?
Context: Hezbollah has insinuated that the protests are the product of a foreign conspiracy against Shiites. That campaign, coupled with unrest in Iraq and Iran over the American killing of a top Iranian commander, has prompted some onetime Lebanese protesters to believe that the United States is secretly maneuvering to pressure the militia and its Shiite partners in all three countries.
Catch up: Lebanon’s refuse crisis says a lot about its political economy.
One consequence of the Fukushima nuclear disaster of 2011: Japan has all but closed its nuclear power program, and now plans to build as many as 22 new coal-fired power plants.
The construction (one site is pictured above) sets Japan apart from other developed economies that are busy phasing out coal. Critics say it also undercuts the government’s effort to portray this summer’s Olympic Games in Tokyo as one of the greenest ever.
Daniel arap Moi: As the autocratic president of Kenya from 1978 to 2002, he ruled the country in a postcolonial era of political repression, economic stagnation and notorious corruption. He died on Tuesday at 95.
Prada: The Italian fashion brand on Tuesday reached a deal with the New York City Commission on Human Rights to provide “racial equity training” for its New York employees and Milan executives, after a civil rights lawyer filed a complaint about figurines that resembled monkeys in blackface.
Tech profits: Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Microsoft made a combined $55.2 billion in net profit in the most recent quarter, making clear that threats of regulatory and legal scrutiny have done little to hurt the bottom line.
Tesla shares: They closed at $887 on Tuesday, up from $650 two trading days earlier, for a gain of 36 percent. That reflects optimism over the electric-car manufacturer’s future, but also moves by the company’s haters to cut their losses.
Snapshot: Above, a nudist dinner party in Florida. (Yes, this is a thing.)
What we’re listening to: This episode of “Literary Friction,” a monthly podcast about books, by Carrie Plitt, a literary agent, and Octavia Bright, a writer and academic. “I’m just catching up with its 2019-in-review episode,” says Chris Stanford of the Briefings team. “And based on their recommendations, I’ve already added to my nightstand’s ever-growing pile.”
Cook: This recipe for a chocolate caramel tart comes from the dawn of the salty-dessert trend, and it’s a perfect example of why the pairing works.
Action: Abi Daré’s debut novel, “The Girl With the Louding Voice,” tells the story of a 14-year-old girl who finds work as a housemaid for a rich family in Lagos, Nigeria.
Smarter Living: A former F.B.I. negotiator offers some interesting tips for travel.
Australia’s bush fires have brought pain and destruction to land, wildlife and property, but they have also highlighted the camaraderie and support that Australians call “mateship.” Damien Cave, our Australia bureau chief, experienced it firsthand recently while reporting on volunteer firefighters. This is his account.
We had just finished interviewing a group of firefighters trying to contain a sprawling blaze, and after bouncing down rocky roads for a few miles, we hit pavement.
That’s when I heard the familiar thump, thump, thump. I turned to Matthew Abbott, the photographer who was driving. “I think we’ve got a flat,” I said.
The back left tire on his Toyota pickup was hissing like a snake. And the jack he had? Built for a smaller car.
While we searched for rocks to prop it up, an S.U.V. pulled over. “Need any help?” the older gentleman behind the wheel asked.
Then a truck driver pulling a load of timber stopped, and a man with tattoos on his arms and legs hopped out.
Within minutes, he’d found a better place for the jack, lying on the ground to push it into place.
Three or four other cars drove down the small country road while we were stuck. Every driver stopped to offer assistance.
Every. Single. One.
Such kindness is no panacea for climate change or mega-blazes, but it does show that Australia has depths of something it will need to recover from this horrific fire season: thoughtfulness and empathy.