To Love, in Fitness and Health
Lyudmila Bouzinova and Jonathan Pearlman are to be married Jan. 12 at the Vizcaya Museum & Gardens in Miami. Rabbi David Englander is to officiate.
The bride, 33, and groom, 31, are co-founders of Mission Lean, a fitness and nutrition brand in Boca Raton, Fla., that focuses on functional training and lean body fitness, with workouts and recipes accessible via an app.
The bride, who is taking her husband’s name, graduated from Boston University and received a master’s degree in economics from Fordham.
She is the daughter of Nadejda N. Bouzinova and Pavel A. Bouzinov of Walpole, Mass. The bride’s father is a structural engineer at Dassault Systemes, a software company in Johnston, R.I. Her mother is a senior human resources information systems administrator at WilmerHale in Boston.
The groom is also the author of “The Lean Body Manual.” He graduated from Harvard.
He is the son of Susan Schneider and Mark Pearlman of New York. The groom’s mother is an investor and philanthropist.
The couple met on Halloween 2011 on the Harvard indoor track, where she was part of a running club and he was training for the college’s tennis season.
“She was the most beautiful woman I had ever seen in my life,” Mr. Pearlman said. “I was not leaving that facility without first talking to her.”
He wasted little time in introducing himself, and did not know that Ms. Bouzinova had already noticed him, and was hoping he would approach her.
“I just thought he was so cute,” she said. “When I saw him coming over to me, I got very excited.”
Within minutes, Mr. Pearlman asked Ms. Bouzinova out on a date and she accepted. Three days later, they met at a coffee shop on the Harvard campus and bonded over a love of fitness and travel.
On their third date, they shared a first kiss inside a reconstructed pyramid that was part of an ancient Egyptian display at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston. They continued dating and soon learned a great deal about each other. Ms. Bouzinova emigrated from Moscow at age 8, and lived in New York for four years, where she modeled professionally and appeared on Season 9 of “America’s Next Top Model.”
Mr. Pearlman grew up on the Upper East Side and attended the Ethical Culture Fieldston School, during which time he competed across the country in national tennis tournaments.
“He was unlike any man I had ever dated in that he never bragged about himself or told me all of the things he was going to do for me,” Ms. Bouzinova said. “He always told me stories about who he really was, and he never tried to put up a front to impress me.”
They soon began traveling together throughout the world, to such places as Spain, England, France, Turkey, Israel and Japan. They relocated to Florida soon after, where they incorporated Mission Lean and set out to share their vision of fitness.
”From the very start, our personalities have always complemented each other,” Mr. Pearlman said. “We could never have achieved anything together if not for her trustworthiness and dedication. She’s someone I know I can always count on.”