The Best Movies and TV Shows New on Netflix Canada in February
Every month, Netflix Canada adds a new batch of TV shows and movies to its library. Here are the titles we think are most interesting for February, broken down by release date. Netflix occasionally changes schedules without giving notice.
‘Horse Girl’
Starts streaming: Feb. 7
Debuting on Netflix just a couple of weeks after its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival, “Horse Girl” is a gearshift for the director Jeff Baena, who’s known more for comedies like the absurdist “I Heart Huckabees,” which he co-wrote, and “The Little Hours,” which turned two stories from “The Decameron” into an anachronistic romp about 14th-century nuns. Here, Baena tries his hand at the psychological thriller, co-written by Alison Brie, who stars as a homely loner who tends to her horse when she’s not logging time as a clerk at an arts and crafts store. Her life takes a drastic turn, however, when she starts experiencing strange visions and suspects she’s being manipulated by an alien species.
‘Road to Roma’
Starts streaming: Feb. 11
For last year’s Oscars, Netflix bet big on “Roma,” Alfonso Cuarón’s critically lauded, semi-autobiographical drama about an upper-middle-class family in early 1970s Mexico City and the poor live-in housekeeper who helped raise their children and keep the chaos at bay. While the film failed to win the streaming service its first Best Picture prize, Netflix’s investment in the film continues to unfurl with “Road to Roma,” a feature-length making-of documentary that’s more in-depth than a typical behind-the-scenes supplement. Cuarón shares memories of his childhood and how his production team brought them to life in such sumptuous detail.
‘To All the Boys: P.S. I Still Love You’
Starts streaming: Feb. 12
With major studios mostly shunning romantic comedies in recent years, Netflix has made them a key niche in its production arsenal, but few have had a bigger impact on the culture than “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before,” a Y.A. adaptation about a high-school junior with a thing for secret love letters. “To All the Boys: P.S. I Still Love You” is the first of two quickie sequels coming to the streaming service, which means the happily-ever-after ending of the original will have to unravel. As Lara Jean (Lana Condor) settles in with her popular new boyfriend (Noah Centineo), the handsome recipient (Jordan Fisher) of an older love letter comes into the picture. Whom will she choose? Get your “Team” hashtags ready.
‘A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon’
Starts streaming: Feb. 14
The lovable simpleton Shaun the Sheep has existed as far back as Nick Park’s Wallace & Gromit short “A Close Shave” in 1995, but in the gallery of Aardman Animations characters, he tended to appeal to the younger set on his own TV series and movie. Yet the 2015 “Shaun the Sheep Movie” had more of an all-ages appeal than expected, and the sequel, “A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon,” looks to take the flock leader on an even darker adventure — or at least dark by Aardman standards. Already released to wide acclaim in Britain, “Farmageddon” has Shaun befriending an alien that crash-lands near Mossy Bottom Farm and must find its way home before humans capture him in the name of science.
‘System Crasher’
Starts streaming: Feb. 21
Picked up by Netflix after its debut at the Berlin Film Festival, the German drama “System Crasher” is a polarizing film about how best to deal with children whose behavior is so antisocial that the system doesn’t know where to place them. Helena Zengel stars as a 9-year-old whose verbal and physical outbursts make her a danger to other children and an undesirable prospect for foster care, but her welfare caseworker (Gabriela Maria Schmeide) is determined to turn her fortunes around. To that end, the girl spends time with a rough-hewn school escort (Albrecht Schuch) who believes that patience and emotional support will have a greater and more lasting impact than medication.
‘All the Bright Places’
Starts streaming: Feb. 28
It’s taken a few years and one false start to produce a screen adaptation of “All the Bright Places,” Jennifer Niven’s widely admired Y.A. novel about two emotionally complicated teenagers who fall in love in small-town Indiana. Now that it’s finally here, the film seems likely to spark a conversation about how these adolescents handle the threat of severe mental illness. Elle Fanning stars as a popular girl whose troubled past informs an emotional connection with a bipolar outcast (Justice Smith) whose isolation from his classmates and family stoke his suicidal tendencies.
‘The Pharmacist’
Starts streaming: Feb. 5
Arriving closely on the heels of “Don’t F**k With Cats: Hunting an Internet Killer,” which was a minor sensation for Netflix two months ago, the documentary series “The Pharmacist” turns again to a remarkable real-life story of amateur sleuthing. The Louisiana pharmacist Dan Schneider turned himself into a gumshoe after the police lost interest in solving his son’s death in a drug-related shooting. His obsession led him to uncover a larger and more complicated case of opioid abuse that was happening under his nose, as young people in his pharmacy were filling OxyContin prescriptions at an alarming rate.
‘Locke & Key’
Starts streaming: Feb. 7
Perhaps the network’s most ambitious horror series since “The Haunting of Hill House,” “Locke & Key” adapts Joe Hill and Gabriel Rodriguez’s graphic novel about another creepy old mansion with a supernatural aura, only this one acts more like a portal to other dimensions. Jackson Robert Scott, Connor Jessup and Emilia Jones star as siblings who move to their ancestral home in Massachusetts after their father’s murder. Once there, they find it littered with magical keys to rooms that give them access to great and horrifying power. The showrunner here is Carlton Cuse, whose years in charge of “Lost” suggests he knows a thing or two about how to manage a puzzle-box premise.
‘My Holo Love’
Starts streaming: Feb. 7
Can a human and an A.I. fall in love? The Korean sci-fi/romance series “My Holo Love” isn’t the first fiction to ask this question — in many respects, the premise recalls Joaquin Phoenix’s fling with an operating system in “Her” — but there are some distinctive twists this time around. Ko Sung-hee stars as an anonymous P.R. functionary at an eyewear company called Prism, which is experimenting with a pair of glasses that will assist in summoning a realistic holographic companion. She falls in love with the kind “Holo,” but her feelings are complicated by the revelation that he’s been modeled off a flesh-and-blood human at the company.
‘Better Call Saul: Season 4’
Starts streaming: Feb. 9
When it was first proposed, the “Breaking Bad” spinoff “Better Call Saul” sounded like a comedy, following the misadventures of Saul Goodman (Bob Odenkirk), a strip-mall attorney of questionable ethics, as he represents the sleaziest clients in the greater Albuquerque area. But over four seasons and counting — the fifth of six seasons premieres on AMC later this month — the show has proved to be a heartbreaking tale about a well-meaning man who goes down the slippery slope of corner-cutting and clever scams. His slow transformation reaches a tipping point in Season 4 and threatens to consume his best friend and partner Kim (Rhea Seehorn), too.
‘Narcos: Mexico: Season 2’
Starts streaming: Feb. 13
When “Narcos” first started on Netflix, it was about the hunt for Pablo Escobar, the Colombian drug kingpin who spent decades building the Cali Cartel before being gunned down in the early 1990s. Yet that story was enough to cover only two seasons. “Narcos” has since evolved into more of a docudrama format for telling other pocket histories of the drug trade, so the casts and locales can be changed out. The second season of “Narcos: Mexico” continues to explore the rise of the Guadalajara Cartel in the ’80s, with Diego Luna returning as the sinister Félix Gallardo and Michael Peña as a D.E.A. agent assigned to stop him.
‘The Chef Show: Volume 3’
Starts streaming: Feb. 19
When he’s not spearheading mega-franchises across the Disney empire, Jon Favreau indulges a passion for food and friendship, first evident from his early 2000s IFC conversation show “Dinner for Five.” The amiable Netflix series “The Chef Show” pairs him with the Korean-American cook Roy Choi, his adviser on the modest 2014 indie film “Chef,” and the two of them now spend every season of “The Chef Show” showcasing innovative dishes and chatting up celebrity guests. Wolfgang Puck and the director Sam Raimi pull up a chair in the third season, along with the owners of eateries like Sprinkles Cupcakes, Pizzana and Wexler’s Deli.
‘Puerta 7’
Starts streaming: Feb. 21
The bilingual American playwright and screenwriter Martin Zimmerman has been in the writers room for Netflix hits like “Narcos” and “Ozark,” and now he’s gone to Argentina to create his own original show about the drug-related violence. Written by Patricio Vega, “Puerta 7” looks into the notorious Argentinean soccer hooligans known as “barra brava,” who organize in support of various teams, but also represent a constant threat of rioting and other forms of violence in the stands. Among other subplots, the show focuses on a woman (Dolores Fonzi) who takes control of a soccer club and tries to purge the fan base of its criminal elements.
‘I Am Not Okay With This’
Starts streaming: Feb. 26
After Netflix turned his graphic novel “The End of the F***ing World” into an acclaimed two-season run, the streaming service is back in the Charles Forsman business with the series “I Am Not Okay With This,” which mixes a supernatural twist with a similar dark irreverence. Sophia Lillis stars as a 15-year-old who’s dealing with the usual trials of a high-school freshman, like complicated friendships and budding sexual interests. The one major wrinkle is that she’s also gifted/cursed with superhero powers that she doesn’t understand and hasn’t yet learned to control.
‘Restaurants on the Edge’
Starts streaming: Feb. 28
Remember “Ramsay’s Kitchen Nightmares,” the Channel 4 reality series in which the tempestuous British chef Gordon Ramsay screamed and bullied his way into revitalizing various failing restaurants? The new series “Restaurants on the Edge” attempts a positive spin on the same concept, following the chef Dennis Prescott, the designer Karin Bohn and the restaurateur Nick Liberato as they try to use a lighter touch in realizing the potential of struggling eateries. The twist of this 13-episode series is that all the restaurants are set against startlingly beautiful locales, including the beaches of Hawaii and the “cottage country” of Muskoka, Canada.
Also of interest: “Frost/Nixon” (Feb. 1), “Gone With the Wind” (Feb. 1), “You’ve Got Mail” (Feb. 1), “Public Enemies” (Feb. 5), “Who Killed Malcolm X?” (Feb. 7), “Isi & Ossi” (Feb. 14), “The Expanding Universe of Ashley Garcia” (Feb. 17), “Gentefied” (Feb. 21), “Arrival” (Feb. 26), “Queen Sono” (Feb. 28).