An Italian Designer Shares an Intimate Glimpse of His Fashion Week
An Italian portrait gallery — a pinacoteca, filled with antique paintings from the family collection — would be a fitting backdrop for an Etro show any season. After all, the brand is the consummate family business, founded in 1968 by Gimmo Etro and now helmed by his four children: Kean, who designs men’s wear; Jacopo, who designs home goods and accessories; Ippolito, who handles brand strategy; and Veronica, who designs women’s wear. (Even Kean’s 8-year-old daughter, Sofia, sometimes consults on runway soundtracks.) The house is also known for trademarks that include a lust for travel and an eye for jewel tones and florid patterns — especially paisley. But for Etro’s fall 2020 men’s wear show in Milan last weekend, Kean paid particular attention to ancestry, weaving together influences from his Italian heritage and from Argentina, where his wife, Constanza Cavalli Etro, grew up. This synthesis showed up throughout the collection: One model strode down the runway in a jacket that was half leather motorcycle and half wool blanket worn over an ocher turtleneck, while the closing look featured a fringed cape adorned with delicate silver embroidery. And, looming over the runway, was a pinacoteca: a collage of 19th-century portraits, some of them depicting the Etros of centuries past.
This season, Kean wasn’t the only men’s wear designer to perceive “the need, the urge for some sort of rooting,” as he described it over the phone this week, “to give a sense of safety and coziness.” (As evidence, he cited recent collections by Pierpaolo Piccioli at Valentino and Virgil Abloh at Louis Vuitton.) This year, after all, has already seen fires raging across Australia and the threat of war between the United States and Iran. So designers felt impelled, he said, “to give some sense of certainty.” It’s unsurprising, then, that when we sent Kean a Polaroid camera and asked him to capture his fashion week, the resulting array of images highlighted the friends and family that surrounded him throughout it.
Between appointments and parties during fashion week, Kean still spends much of the day in his studio. He manages to carve out a little down time, though: “While preparing the winter show, we designers find ourselves in our spare hours preparing the summer collection,” he notes. “By the way, it’s nearly ready.”
“Walking up and down the staircase in the showroom, I end up doing something like 7.5 miles a day during fashion week,” he says.
To inform this season’s collection, Kean delved into the textile designs of the native Argentine Mapuche people, infusing them with an Italian sensibility. Here, what he describes as a “magical carpet story” hangs on a garment rack.
The designer’s extensive library — which includes several thousand books, he estimates — includes the classic Argentine gaucho myth of Martín Fierro, about a soldier turned outlaw, as well as this more contemporary book about the South American cowboys. He describes the gauchos, as well as the Mapuche, as “my everlasting love theme,” in part because of their connection to his wife. “Argentina is also love,” he says. “Part of the family is there.”
Sustainability, which Kean describes as “the right balance between biodiversity and the reuse of ‘garbage,’” has long been at the center of his practice. For this blanket, he sourced wool from sheep who live near the Etro factory — the white from Puglia and the dark brown from Abruzzo. As a result, the garment doesn’t require dyes or extensive transportation infrastructure, minimizing its environmental impact. “The more things we can say about real sustainability, the better,” he says. “I have to make myself useful.”
The model Parker Van Noord, son of the late Dutch model Andre Van Noord.
Constanza, the couple’s daughter, Sofia, and her friend Kristo examine the show’s pinacoteca, which comprised 19th-century portraits from the Etro family collection.
Another view of the pinacoteca, which Kean recreated for the show from his family’s antiques collection.
The model Daniel Morel in a look printed with a painting from the pinacoteca: “Our ancestors watching over us,” Kean says.
“Irama, my favorite Italian singer, with his fiancée, Victoria Stella Doritou.”
Kean holds court before a group of journalists, “explaining the sense of tradition and ancestry,” he says, that marked his show.
Sofia dances to the Temptations’ “Ball of Confusion,” which ended the show. “The show is also party time, family time,” Kean says.
Kean with his design team. After the show, the whole group (often joined by Veronica’s team) goes out to celebrate; this year, in keeping with the show’s theme, they chose an Argentine place. “There’s so much euphoria,” he says. “The adrenaline is very high at the end of the show.”