Love Letter: ‘I Can Take Myself to the Movies’
[Sign up here to receive Love Letter, a weekly newsletter about relationship highs, lows and woes, in your inbox every Friday.]
After experiencing one too many hookups that never quite made it past go, or even to dinner and a movie, Mae-sa Dixon re-evaluated her love life. In 2013, she quit dating and sex entirely. Although some friends and family judge her decision, Ms. Dixon said she feels empowered by her new lifestyle: “I just became so much more confident in my own abilities, because I didn’t need someone to make me feel fulfilled or complete.”
In this week’s Modern Love essay, Michelle Dowd, who had grown accustomed to not hearing “I love you” as a child, shared how she came to realize the value of those words.
This week’s Vows column features a dramatic union. When Kate Hamill, an actor and screenwriter, met Jason O’Connell, a fellow actor, there was an immediate spark. However, Ms. Hamill had a boyfriend. When Ms. Hamill’s play, “Sense and Sensibility,” was in need of a leading man, she asked Mr. O’Connell to play the part. He eventually went from being her co-star to her real-life love.
Email your relationship questions to our inbox and we will answer a reader’s love-related question each week, right here in the Love Letter newsletter. Spoiler alert: We are not licensed professionals, but we understand that love is complicated and we’re here to help provide support, thoughtful advice and resources. Please be sure to include your name, city (town) and state, along with your question.
We want to hear from you.
We want to deliver content that truly matters to you and your feedback is helpful. Email your thoughts to loveletter@nytimes.com.
Also, here’s how to submit a Modern Love essay or how to be featured in an Unhitched column. Don’t feel like writing more than a tweet, an Instagram caption or a Facebook post? Consider submitting to Tiny Love Stories, which are no more than 100 words. Getting married? Here’s how to submit a wedding announcement.