Lesson of the Day: ‘What Happened When a State Made Food Stamps Harder to Get’
Featured Article: “What Happened When a State Made Food Stamps Harder to Get” by Campbell Robertson.
In December, the Trump administration finalized a rule that would remove hundreds of thousands of people from the federal food stamp program by strictly enforcing work requirements. The rule, effective on April 1, is expected to save nearly $5.5 billion over five years.
Four years ago, similar work requirements were enacted in West Virginia. What can nine counties in West Virginia tell us about the future impact of federal cuts to food stamps?
In this lesson, you will reflect on your personal views and attitudes toward government welfare programs like food stamps and then examine the actual impact of changes to food stamp policies in West Virginia. In a Going Further activity, you will make an argument for or against federal cuts to food stamps by the Trump administration.
For each of the following statements, state whether you strongly agree, agree, disagree or strongly disagree. Then, discuss with your classmates or explore in writing why you think the way you do. (Note to teachers: If you’re doing this in a classroom context, you might do it as a Four Corners activity.)
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. Why does the article begin with the story of Chastity and Paul Peyton? How do their struggles illuminate the impact of West Virginia’s change to food stamp requirements?
2. What changes to federal food stamp requirements were enacted in 1996? How were states able to get around these rules in economic hard times — like the great recession of 2008? How will the Trump administration’s new rules affect states and people who receive food stamps?
3. What did Mitch Webb, the director of the Huntington City Mission, notice after the new food stamp policy in nine counties in West Virginia went into full effect? How were his observations similar to those of staff members in other homeless missions and food pantries across the state?
4. Why does Tom Fast, a Republican lawmaker, consider changes to West Virginia’s policy a success? How do studies by the West Virginia Center on Budget and Policy and the Department of Health and Human Resources either support or challenge Mr. Fast’s views?
5. What does the author mean by the “never-ending logistics of poverty”? Give three examples. How does Jerome Comer’s story illustrate these realities and challenges?
6. The article concludes:
Do you agree with Mr. Comer? Do you think that food stamps address the root problem of food insecurity and poverty in America? If not, do you think there are viable alternatives that would or could?
Choose one or both of the following activities:
1) Return to the warm-up activity: Did reading the article change your views on any of your earlier statements? If yes, why? Choose one statement and write about why you hold that view or why your view has changed.
2) Do you think the Trump administration’s new federal rules on food stamp eligibility help or hurt Americans? Explain why or why not.
In developing your response, consider the following questions: Should all able-bodied Americans be required to work to receive food stamps? Should food stamps be limited to no more than three months in a three-year period? Should states be able to waive those rules in times of economic hardship? On the whole, do you think food stamps provide an important safety net or an incentive to Americans not to work hard? Use evidence from the article to support your viewpoint.
Additionally, keep in mind the challenge the Peytons’ face of “paying too much to qualify for benefits one month, offering too few hours to qualify the next,” as well as their own concern about people “just getting things handed to them.”
You might consider writing your ideas in the form of an editorial, and then submitting your final draft to our Seventh Annual Student Editorial Contest.
Need more information? Here are some additional Times links:
“Hundreds of Thousands Are Losing Access to Food Stamps”
“How Cutting Food Stamps Can Add Costs Elsewhere”
“Democratic Attorneys General Sue to Block Trump Food Stamp Cuts”
“The SNAP Rule Will Cause More Hunger Than We Can Handle” | Op-Ed
“The Cruel Farce of Cutting Food Stamps” | The New York Times’s editorial board
And here are a few outside viewpoints:
“Trump’s Commonsensical Food-Stamp Rule” | National Review
“No, Trump’s Food Stamp Plan Wouldn’t Have Cut Off AOC’s Family” | Reason Magazine
“The Dignity of Work and the American Dream” | Op-ed by Sonny Purdue, United States secretary of agriculture, in The Arizona Daily Star