In Impeachment Battle, California Stands on the Front Lines
LOS ANGELES — When The Sacramento Bee published a scathing editorial about the impeachment trial last week — using words like “deliberately misled” “betrayed” and “lied” — much of the newspaper’s wrath was directed not at President Trump, but at one of his leading defenders: Devin Nunes, a Republican congressman who represents the Central Valley.
Across the state, another California congressman was being targeted by Mr. Trump’s backers for his role in seeking to remove the president from office. “Liar!” demonstrators shouted at Adam B. Schiff, the Los Angeles Democrat who is the lead House manager.
As the Senate trial of Mr. Trump barrels ahead in Washington, California is playing an outsized role. It has lawmakers who have been leading the investigation of Mr. Trump for months, and at the same time, lawmakers who have been fighting fiercely on the president’s behalf.
Those divergent views can be seen from Fresno to Santa Monica, in a state that is far more politically complex than its image.
“In California we have red counties and blue counties, just like America has red states and blue states,” said Gil Duran, the California opinion editor at The Sacramento Bee, who wrote the recent editorial about Mr. Nunes.
After three years at the vanguard of the battle against Mr. Trump — on the environment, immigration and reproductive rights — it is no surprise that California Democrats are on the front lines of the drive to remove him from office.
There is Mr. Schiff, from Los Angeles, who  said on Thursday that Mr. Trump was a danger “to our country.” Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, whose assent was needed to bring the proceedings, represents San Francisco. And polls suggest that California voters are more supportive of impeaching Mr. Trump than are voters nationally, reflecting the Democrat’s big registration edge in a state that Mr. Trump lost by nearly 4 million votes in 2016.
Yet the impeachment trial in Washington has also invigorated what has emerged as a Republican resistance to the state’s resistance to the president.
And it is a reminder that portraits of California as overwhelmingly Democratic gloss over the nuances of the state’s political makeup. The Republican Party in California, a onetime powerhouse that gave the country numerous G.O.P. luminaries, has shrunken in the last 30 years. Still, the state’s areas of Republican power remain strong and influential.
In Washington, the California Republican delegation punches above its weight.
Kevin McCarthy, a Republican from the Central Valley, is the House minority leader, and helped unite his caucus behind Mr. Trump, a longtime ally, in opposing impeachment. Mr. Nunes, who has served in Congress since 2003 and grew up in a dairy farming family, is another of Mr. Trump’s heartiest backers, often appearing on Fox News combatively defending the president.
Mr. Nunes has become a prominent figure in the investigation of Mr. Trump. Text messages have connected one of Mr. Nunes’ aides to the administration’s efforts to prod the Ukrainian government to seek potentially damaging information about Joseph R. Biden Jr., the former vice president and possible challenger to Mr. Trump in this year’s election. Even Ken Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel who is now on Mr. Trump’s defense team, has a California connection: he served for six years as dean of the Pepperdine University School of Law in Malibu.
All of this reflects how, even as the state has become more liberal overall, rock-solid pockets of conservatism remain in areas like San Diego and the Central Valley, where both Mr. Nunes and Mr. McCarthy remain popular among their constituents and are likely to cruise to re-election in November.
“I have relatives who grew up on welfare, and had an undocumented parent, and I see them posting pro-Trump memes on Facebook and I ask, how did that happen?” said Mr. Duran, the Bee opinion editor, who grew up poor in Tulare County, a conservative region partly in Mr. Nunes’s district. “Welcome to deep red California,” Mr. Duran said.
On a recent Saturday morning, two people stood on a street corner in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, defiantly hoisting signs reading “Recall Newsom.” It is part of a quixotic, yet persistent, drive by Republicans to oust Gov. Gavin Newsom, the first-term Democrat, over homelessness and the high cost of gasoline, among other things. Since the beginning of his term, Governor Newsom has been at war with the president, taking on the Trump administration in legal battles and Twitter fights.
Republican former members of Congress who were swept out of office in 2018 are trying to get back on the stage, including Darrell Issa of San Diego. Mr. Issa, who declined to seek re-election in 2018 in the face of a strong Democratic challenge, has decided to run this year for a different seat, the one held until recently by a fellow Republican, Duncan Hunter, who resigned after pleading guilty to using campaign funds for personal expenses.
In Mr. Hunter’s old district, Randy Birrenkott, 70, said he knows many neighbors who became disgusted with California’s liberal politics and moved to places like Texas or Montana. “Right now it’s a strong conservative district, but it’s slowly going down,” he said.
California is not the only state whose political complexity is often overlooked in the shorthand of a polarized era. New York as a whole is overwhelmingly Democratic, but upstate New York and the New York City borough of Staten Island are as Republican as parts of Central California are.  
New York Democrats like Chuck Schumer, the Senate minority leader, and Jerrold Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, have played important roles in the impeachment drama. But with Mr. Schiff, Ms. Pelosi, Mr. McCarthy and Mr. Nunes at the forefront of the daily battles in Washington, no other state has become quite as identified with the impeachment battle as California has.
The Republican Party is hobbled in California, and many moderate Republicans believe it will only become less influential in years ahead. The party has been on a steady decline for nearly 20 years in the state, where Richard M. Nixon was born and where Ronald Reagan was one of its most successful governors.
There are now more independent voters in California than registered Republicans. The G.O.P. does not hold a single statewide office, and is vastly outnumbered in the legislature. While the effort to recall Mr. Newsom has the support of Republican leaders, it is unlikely to gain enough signatures to qualify for the ballot. or enough support to win the approval of voters if it did.
Republican moderates — who were once a major force in the party, particularly when Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, was governor — have been marginalized.
But as the state party has shrunk,  it has shifted to the right and embraced Mr. Trump.
Across the nation, the Republican Party has become more conservative, and California is not the only place where moderates have been driven out of its ranks. But there is almost certainly a higher political price for that trend in California. The more the party becomes identified with Mr. Trump, particularly on issues like the environment, abortion and immigration, the tougher time the party is likely to have winning  elections.
Still, conservatives wield considerable influence in the state. High-profile rightwing media outlets are active in Southern California, where Ben Shapiro, the conservative commentator and founder of the Daily Wire, runs his empire and where the conservative radio host Dennis Prager operates his youth-focused Prager University.
Even in largely liberal Los Angeles, there are plenty of voters who say they are outraged over the effort to impeach Mr. Trump.
“Crooked is the word that comes to mind,” said Alan Herrera, 48, a bail enforcement agent from East Hollywood, referring to Mr. Schiff. “This gentleman is a liar. He has lied repeatedly, he has claimed things were there when they weren’t, and he has basically run impeachment on baseless, faceless accusations.”
Of course, Mr. Schiff, a former prosecutor who is mild-mannered but cutting in his public remarks about Mr. Trump, can count on many more defenders of his impeachment role among his constituents.
Alexander Seedman, 28, a writer in West Hollywood, said the impeachment process had been “really hard to follow, because I find it so enraging, knowing that the Republicans are trying to hide so much evidence.”
But he said, “Just hearing Adam Schiff speak so clearly and eloquently about what went wrong, it just seems to obvious to me —  and yet, we have more than half of the Senate who clearly just doesn’t want to listen.” He added, “Nancy Pelosi and Adam Schiff are my new heroes at this point, and I feel really proud to live in a state that they come from, because I think they’re doing an incredible job.”