What’s on TV Tuesday: ‘Miracle Workers: Dark Ages’ and ‘Afterward’
MIRACLE WORKERS: DARK AGES 10:30 p.m. on TBS. This strange comedy starring Daniel Radcliffe and Steve Buscemi is back for a new season, though the only elements that remain the same are the cast. This installment is an anthology, and it poses a contrast to the original “Miracle Workers” series, which was set in heaven with Radcliffe as an angel and Buscemi as God. Now, Radcliffe is Prince Chauncley, the simple-minded son of great tyrant who, as Chauncley points out, could probably benefit from anger-management therapy. The rest of the cast members return as medieval villagers who are trying to navigate life in a time of great ignorance, where, as the one of the characters is taught in school, “The Earth is flat, the devil is real, and that is everything that we know.”
AFTERWARD (2018) Rent on iTunes, Amazon, Google Play and Vudu. The first feature by the Israeli filmmaker Ofra Bloch, this documentary aims to understand where the past and present of Jewish identity collide — using discussions with Europeans, Palestinians and other Israelis. Bloch, who grew up in the aftermath of the Holocaust, was taught to fear Germans, and many Palestinians she speaks with fear an Israeli occupation. In her interviews, Bloch works to uncover the residual effects of a historical genocide and balance them with modern sentiments of aggression in the Middle East. “But by the end of the documentary,” Ken Jaworowski wrote in his review for The New York Times, “she and many of her subjects posit that it’s possible to learn from history and to change, and to trust each other a little more.” He added, “You can’t help but hope they’re right.”
SPANGLISH (2004) Stream on HBO and Hulu; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. Adam Sandler stars in this dramatic comedy as John Clasky, alongside Téa Leoni as his wife, Deborah. Paz Vega is Flor, a single mother who, after emigrating from Mexico with her daughter, finds work in the dysfunctional Los Angeles Clasky household despite not knowing any English. This proves to be only a minor issue, as the family’s inability to communicate with each other is much harder to overcome than Flor’s language barrier. As she settles in, Flor proves to be an indispensable member of the family who teaches the Claskys more about understanding one another than they could have imagined.
HUNTING JONBENÉT’S KILLER: THE UNTOLD STORY Stream on Hulu; rent on Amazon. It has been 24 years since JonBenet Ramsey — a 6-year-old beauty pageant queen — was found dead in the basement of her family’s Boulder, Colo., home, resulting in one of America’s most-well-known cold case killings to date. This special presentation with Elizabeth Vargas explores new leads — including new DNA tests — and introduces an interview with JonBenet’s father, John Ramsey, who had long been a suspect in her death.