Corrections: Jan. 26, 2020
This weekend’s cover story about Nigerian art stolen by British troops in the 19th century misstates the date on which James Phillips, a British official, set out on a journey to visit the ruler of Benin. It was Jan. 2, 1897, not New Year’s Day of that year.
An article on Page 16 about “Before Sunrise” misstates the film’s box office take. It made about $5.9 million domestically, not worldwide. It took in an additional $17.2 million internationally.
An article on Jan. 5 about a program in Kentucky aimed at helping people recovering from opioid addiction misstated the number of pills that drug companies saturated the state with between 2006 and 2012. It was 1.9 billion, not 1.9 million.
The Trending article last Sunday, about hotels that use wine as a perk, misspelled the name of a hotel in Trondheim, Norway. It is the Britannia, not Brittania.
An article on Jan. 12 about Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, as part of the 52 Places to Go in 2020 special issue, misstated the location of Aksum, the city which, according to Ethiopian tradition, was the home of the Queen of Sheba. Aksum is in northern Ethiopia, hundreds of miles from Addis Ababa; it is not within Addis Ababa.
Because of an editing error, the Living In article last Sunday, about Hyde Park, N.Y., omitted the given name and misstated the courtesy title in the attribution for a quotation about the town’s location. The speaker was Aileen Rohr, the town supervisor.
A picture caption with the Shopping Guide article last Sunday, about coasters, was duplicated and misidentified a set of coasters with animal images on them. It was the Party Animals Needlepoint Coaster Set, made by Smathers & Branson, not the Table Tiles set by Bower.
An article on Dec. 22 about home funerals referred incorrectly to a result of a lawsuit brought by Rabbi Daniel Wasserman against the Pennsylvania board of funeral directors. The board agreed that clergy members may conduct “religious” burial services without a funeral director. The Funeral Director Law was not amended.
A review on Dec. 29 about the picture book “While Grandpa Naps” misspelled the given name of its illustrator. She is Junghwa Park, not Jungwa.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.