The Detroit Symphony Needed a Fill-In. It Found a Music Director.
When heart surgery in 2018 forced the conductor Leonard Slatkin to miss the final concerts of his decade-long tenure as music director of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra, the ensemble turned to an Italian conductor three decades younger, Jader Bignamini, to step in.
The players and maestro hit it off. So much so that the orchestra announced on Wednesday that Mr. Bignamini, 43, would become its new music director next season, when he begins a six-year contract.
“There was certainly a feeling of ‘amore a prima vista,’ meaning ‘love at first sight,’” Mr. Bignamini said in a statement. Stephen Molina, a bass player who served on the search committee, said that Mr. Bignamini’s “immediate connection to the musicians was unique.”
Mr. Bignamini, who is also the resident conductor of the Orchestra Sinfonica di Milano Giuseppe Verdi, sealed the deal when he returned in October to conduct Mahler’s Fourth Symphony, in what had initially been planned as his debut in Detroit.
Choosing a conductor who has been best known for opera — when he jumped in for Mr. Slatkin in 2018, it was for concert performances of Puccini’s “Turandot” — and who is not yet well known in the United States is something of a risk for this orchestra. The Detroit Symphony started the last decade with a painful strike and has been working to rebuild itself ever since, alongside its struggling city — in part by stressing accessibility and streaming concerts for free online.
But Mr. Bignamini’s star has been rising of late. This season includes his debuts with orchestras in Toronto, Houston, Dallas and Minnesota, the Canadian Opera Company, and the Bavarian State Opera in Munich. He also tours with the star soprano Anna Netrebko.
Anne Parsons, the president and chief executive officer of the Detroit Symphony, said in a statement that Mr. Bignamini “both embodies and exudes enthusiasm and authenticity, and he has an inspiring vision for building on the musical legacy of the D.S.O., this city, and its community.”
Born in Crema, near Milan, Mr. Bignamini was drawn to the clarinet as a child and studied at the conservatory in Piacenza. His opera career has taken off in recent years, with engagements at the Metropolitan Opera, the Vienna State Opera and the Dutch National Opera, among others. When he made his debut at the Met in 2017 leading “Madama Butterfly,” Zachary Woolfe wrote in The New York Times that he conducted “with properly Puccinian balances of lushness and forward motion.”
Mr. Bignamini, a jazz fan who said he plans to enjoy the jazz scene in his new city, will be back in Detroit this week, conducting Paganini’s Violin Concerto No. 1 (with Augustin Hadelich as soloist) and Berlioz’s “Symphonie Fantastique.” True to form, the orchestra will stream his concert, free of charge, on Sunday afternoon at 3 p.m. at dso.org/live and on Facebook Live.