Lesson of the Day: ‘Ready, Set, Vote: Here’s Everything You Need to Know for the 2020 Primaries’
Featured Article: “Ready, Set, Vote: Here’s Everything You Need to Know for the 2020 Primaries”
The New York Times provides 35 timely questions and answers to queries such as: What’s the difference between a primary and a caucus? Who is likely to win the Democratic presidential nomination? What issues have dominated the campaign so far?
In this lesson, you will learn more about the presidential race and the election process. In a Going Further activity, you will research a question, candidate or issue more fully.
On Monday, Feb. 3, the 2020 presidential primary season begins with the Iowa caucuses.
How much have you been paying attention to the presidential campaign? Do you discuss it with your friends and family or in school? Do you have a favorite candidate or issue? Are you confused or frustrated by it all?
Use this graphic organizer to create a K/W/L chart with everything you know about the election process and the 2020 presidential candidates along with any questions you might have.
Share your chart with a partner and see if you can answer each other’s questions.
(If time permits, make a whole class list of remaining unanswered questions.)
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. Which of the 35 questions and answers did you find to be most helpful? Which were most surprising? Give at least three examples and explain why you chose them.
2. The primary process is very complicated. Explain in your own words how someone wins the Democratic nomination. What are delegates and superdelegates?
3. Which issues have dominated the campaign, according to the article? Are you interested in any of these issues? Which topics would you like candidates to address more?
4. There is lots of attention on the Democratic race. What is happening on the Republican side? Is President Trump guaranteed his party’s nomination? Do you think the other Republican candidates should receive more media attention?
5. The article states: “For months, Democratic voters have talked constantly about electability. They have had a harder time agreeing on what it means — or at least, who best embodies it.” How would you explain the concept of electability, and do you think it is an important criterion for considering a candidate? What are the most important factors for picking a candidate to you?
6. Add what you learned about the 2020 primaries to your K/W/L chart from the warm-up. On the whole, do you think you have a clear understanding of the 2020 presidential primary process? Which questions remain unanswered? Which new ones emerged?
Choose one of the following activities:
1) Research a question, candidate or issue further.
What questions do you still have? Were any of your questions from the warm-up activity not fully addressed or answered in the article? Did any new questions emerge from your reading? Which candidates or issues do you want to know more about? Conduct additional research and share it with your class.
A good place to start your research is the Times Topic page for Elections, which includes up-to-date election news, profiles of each candidate, the latest polls and what’s ahead.
The Times has also published many great audio and visual resources on the candidates and the issues:
18 Questions. 21 Democrats. Here’s What They Said | Video
20 (More) Questions With Democrats. | Video
Who’s Actually Electable in 2020? | The Daily podcast
The Democratic Showdown in Iowa | The Daily podcast
2) Propose a change to the nomination process:
In “The Presidential Nominating Process Is Absurd,” David Leonhardt writes:
What do you think? Should we change the presidential nomination process? Should Iowa always go first? Does the primary calendar need to be overhauled? Should more states hold caucuses? Should the nomination process be shortened? Do we need ranked-choice voting in primaries? Should we end the role of superdelegates? If you are in favor of changes, give at least one specific change, and explain what the existing problem is and how your change would improve the process.
3) Endorse a candidate.
The New York Times editorial board recently endorsed two Democratic candidates: Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar. In its editorial, the board wrote of Senator Warren:
Of Senator Klobuchar, the board argued:
Which candidate would you endorse?
Be sure to justify your pick by describing the qualities you value most in your candidate, such as character, experience, accomplishments, stance on the issues and electability.
You might consider writing your ideas in the form of an editorial and then submitting your final draft to our Seventh Annual Student Editorial Contest.
4) Make a prediction (or two).
Who do you think will win the Iowa caucuses? Who do you think will win the Democratic nomination? Explain your reasoning.
Feel free to consider the latest polling information, but heed the warning from the article: “The only bulletproof prediction through political history is that people who make political predictions will keep getting things wrong sometimes.”
Lesson Plan | Election 2016: Understanding Primaries and Caucuses
Election 2016: Our Teaching and Learning Homepage
And the Winner Is …? Using Statistics to Predict the 2016 Presidential Election
