What to See Right Now in New York Art Galleries
Suzanne Jackson has had a storied career as a dancer, choreographer, and set designer, as well as a fine artist. But in her New York gallery solo debut, “News!” at Ortuzar Projects, she’s showing paintings: the conventional kind, and her own exploded version.
Paintings like “Lizzie and Me With Friends” or “Lizards,” bold vortices of color traversed by surprising silhouettes, can certainly stand alone. But the real magic is in what they do to pieces like “Hers and His,” an exhilarating construction of fabric circles, crumpled paper, and acrylic paint hanging far enough from the wall to cast a shadow. Pink and yellow discs that could be suns, flowers, or the cogs of some transcendental machine burst up out of two motley columns in the piece’s upper half, while clear acrylic glitters like smashed safety glass around its edges.
Next to work like this, you can’t help noticing the way a more conventional painting isolates a small range of choices: You expect it to be flat, rectangular and hanging against a white wall, so that you can focus on what the artist has done in two dimensions. But that narrowness, in turn, reveals a piece like “Hers and His” as an almost unlimited arena of creative decisions. Its placement, size, texture, depth and overall shape — something like the untanned hide of a mythical beast — all light up at once, and you hardly know where to begin.
WILL HEINRICH
Mike Kelley (1954—2012) was a restlessly interdisciplinary artist best known for certain themes — youth, trauma, American pop culture — and materials (most famously, found stuffed animals) — rather than a particular genre or form. That makes the exhibition “Mike Kelley: Timeless Painting,” which focuses on his relationship to the titular medium and features works from different series created over 15 years, seem like an anomaly. But it’s an intriguing, welcome one.
The centerpiece is “Profondeurs Vertes” (2006), a mixed-media installation featuring three videos that pan across and zoom in on a handful of 18th- and 19th-century American paintings from the collection of the Detroit Institute of Arts, which Mr. Kelley visited as a child. The videos both study and animate the pictures, aided by a dramatic original score that blends classical music, poetry and sounds of the sea. Nearby hangs a portrait by Mr. Kelley of a minor, partly obscured figure from one of the Detroit museum works — a comedic punch line about the “elevating” effect of art.
The rest of the show, which includes a series revisiting Mr. Kelley’s undergraduate art school assignments and another of faithful renderings of wood grain, bounces from deconstruction to parody to an experimental embrace of painting. Taken as a whole, the exhibition suggests a postmodern artist puzzling his way through a problem: Centuries after the creation of those works hanging in Detroit, what more is the medium good for?
JILLIAN STEINHAUER