What to Cook This Week
Good morning. Dorie Greenspan took on the Swedish concept of “fika” this week in The Times: a coffee break, essentially, with a little bite to eat, a moment to slow down and connect with others, to reflect. Of course she has a recipe to go with her story, for Swedish almond cake (above), and I’m hoping you will make it today and bring its cozy deliciousness into your life and the lives of others, with big mugs of milky coffee and lots of conversation.
For dinner tonight, maybe some coconut-braised chicken thighs with turmeric and peppers? Or some red curry lentils with sweet potatoes and spinach?
On Monday, I’m thinking, you could make creamy cauliflower soup with rosemary oil, eat it with big hunks of bread and a glass of red wine, watch Clemson play L.S.U. for college football’s national championship, in New Orleans.
Tuesday, how about a sheet-pan salmon and broccoli, with sesame and ginger? That, or sheet-pan salmon with maple, miso and green beans? Make salmon, anyway. You could steam it. Sauté it. Grill it. We’ll show you all the ways.
Wednesday night could be a fine one for vegan Caesar salad. Or vegan macaroni and cheese. Or you could make some big, sloppy bulgogi-style sloppy Joes, with scallion salsa.
I like this dinner of quick chicken and dumplings for supper on Thursday. You may prefer a mojo-style bird with pineapple instead.
Whichever, I’d like to end the week with a proper wedge salad and a honking big steak, then spend the weekend on the couch napping like Dagwood.
How about you? Come visit us at NYT Cooking if you’re seeking inspiration I haven’t yet provided. (Why, here’s a devil’s food white-out cake! And here’s how to use your Instant Pot!) You do need a subscription to access the site, but you knew that coming in: Subscriptions are the way of the world now. I think that’s probably a good thing. It means I work for you!
You can find us on Facebook, of course, if Facebook is your jam. We even have a NYT Cooking community group there, where everyone is, most always, welcoming and nice. We’re on Instagram, too, with nice pictures and lots of emoji. Of course we’re on Twitter. All journalists are. And please find us on YouTube — watch Alison Roman make the best baked ziti there, and you’re likely to like and subscribe.
You can write us for help if something goes sideways with your cooking or our technology: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Someone will get back to you.
Now, I know it doesn’t have anything to do with béchamel sauce or squeezed lemons, but Parul Sehgal got me very excited about “Homie,” Danez Smith’s new book of poems, and I hope you’ll feel the same.
Look! Our pal Priya Krishna’s in a video on The New Yorker, talking about her mom’s cooking.
See what you think of “The Whale Detective” on PBS.
Finally, The Times has published its annual list of 52 Places to Go. What’s on your travel wish list for 2020? Me: New Zealand; the Aleutian Islands; Los Roques in Venezuela. I’ll be back here tomorrow, though. Cook well.