National Endowment for the Humanities Announces New Grants
An on-site augmented reality tour addressing the 1970 Kent State University shootings, a database that will allow users to search a painting collection by pigment, digital course modules on Florida’s African-American history and a digital anthology of almost 300 hymn melodies published in the United States before 1861 are among the 188 recipients of new grants from the National Endowment for the Humanities.
The grants, which total $30.9 million, are the first of three rounds that will be awarded this year. They are distributed across 45 states and the District of Columbia. An additional $48 million was awarded to the national network of state, territorial and jurisdictional humanities councils for educational outreach programs.
“These new N.E.H. grants will expand access to the country’s wealth of historical, literary and artistic resources by helping archivists and curators care for important heritage collections, and using new media to inspire examination of significant texts and ideas,” Jon Parrish Peede, the chairman of the endowment, said in a statement.
“These projects will open pathways for students to engage meaningfully with the humanities and focus public attention on the history, culture and political thought of the United States’ first 250 years as a nation,” Mr. Peede added.
In New York, funding will go toward the preservation and digitization of the New York Public Radio Archives, a digital history of the New York Conspiracy trials of 1741 and the creation of an app for children and families that teaches Oneida folklore, language, culture and philosophy.
Elsewhere, the American Association of State and Local History in Nashville was awarded a grant to develop resources for small historical associations to commemorate the nation’s 250th anniversary in 2026.
Funding will also go toward developing a curriculum at Whatcom Community College in Bellingham, Wash., that creates new courses on the history, cultures and science of the Salish Sea. A project at the University of Alaska Southeast to transcribe and translate Tlingit oral literature will also receive funding.
Rice Public Library in Kittery, Maine, built in 1888, was given N.E.H. funding to renovate their building to be in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. The University of Arkansas was awarded funds to create an interactive website and kiosk display about the American architect Fay Jones. St. Augustine College in Chicago received funding to incorporate the study of Chicago’s art, music and history into courses for early childhood educators.