$1 Million Homes in California
This house is five miles from downtown Oakland, in Oakmore, a hillside neighborhood of Tudor-style homes built in the 1920s and 1930s, mostly for Bay Area professionals who relied on the Key Route (the streetcar predecessor to the BART system) to travel between Oakland and San Francisco. Many homes in the area have redwood views, and this house is a five-minute drive from Joaquin Miller Park, with 500 acres of dense redwood, oak and pine trees.
Oakland International Airport is a 20-minute drive, and the 12th St. Oakland BART station, which provides connections to other parts of the East Bay as well as San Francisco, is about a 10-minute drive.
Size: 1,642 square feet
Price per square foot: $606
Indoors: To the left of the entry is a formal living room with garden-view windows and a fireplace framed in granite. Up a single step from the living room is the formal dining room, which flows into a spacious chef’s kitchen featuring granite countertops and a Viking range. A casual eating area adjoining the kitchen, just off the foyer, gets ample sunlight.
One guest bedroom has space for a full-size bed, while another features a leaded-glass window, a hallmark of Tudor Revival architecture.
The expansive master suite has windows on two sides and doors that open to a wood deck with a staircase down to the landscaped backyard. The master bathroom was renovated in 2019 and includes a walk-in shower and a marble-topped vanity. Attached to the master suite is a sitting area big enough for a sofa and chair.
An additional bedroom suite with its own bathroom is reached by an exterior staircase.
Outdoor space: The stone patio in the backyard is framed by landscaping and has a built-in wooden bench for additional seating. A one-car garage is attached to the house.
Taxes: $10,238 (estimated)
Contact: Joanna Hirsch, the Grubb Co., 510-339-0400, ext. 219; 3918hanly.com
Long a destination for midcentury-modern aficionados, Palm Springs is a desert community about 100 miles east and a 90-minute drive from downtown Los Angeles, traffic permitting. In recent years, the area has seen an increase in new construction inspired by midcentury architecture, drawing retirees or vacationers who favor 1960s housing but aren’t eager to take on the work associated with living in an older home.
This house, built in 2014 and outfitted with solar panels and a tankless water heater, is in a gated community attached to the Escena Golf Club. The course and clubhouse are public, so there are no membership fees.
Size: 2,591 square feet
Price per square foot: $380
Indoors: The main hallway off the front entry leads to a living-and-dining area with an open kitchen. South-facing floor-to-ceiling windows with motorized shades offer views of the golf course and, in the distance, the San Jacinto Mountains.
The kitchen has sleek gray cabinetry, Bosch appliances and an oversized island for dining or entertaining.
The master suite, off the main hallway, has sliding-glass doors that open to a patio. The en suite bathroom includes a walk-in shower and a free-standing soaking tub.
A second bedroom includes space for a queen-size bed, and a third could be used as a den or home office. One guest bathroom features a walk-in shower, while the other has a combination tub and shower.
Outdoor space: The backyard is divided into two sections: a saltwater pool and small concrete patio with enough space for several lounge chairs that is directly outside the living area and, to the right, a cozy seating area with a firepit connected to the master suite by concrete pavers. A one-car garage is attached to the house.
Taxes: $10,135 (estimated), plus a $180 monthly homeowner association fee
Contact: Matthew Reader, the Paul Kaplan Group, 760-969-2278; paulkaplanrealtor.com
This home is in the heart of Atwater Village, a small but lively neighborhood north of downtown Los Angeles, between Los Feliz, Griffith Park and Glendale. The owners, who renovated the house in 2014, also worked to create climate-appropriate landscaping with succulents and other plants that would remain colorful while requiring less water than a traditional lawn.
The property is a 25-minute drive from downtown and a 40-minute drive from Los Angeles International Airport. The boutiques and restaurants of Los Feliz Boulevard are within a five-minute walk.
Size: 884 square feet
Price per square foot: $1,130
Indoors: The handsome wooden front door is original to the house, as is the living room fireplace. The dark hardwood floors in the main seating area continue into the dining room, where an arched picture window looks out onto the street.
The kitchen is the centerpiece of the home, with slate-blue cabinetry, white-tile backsplashes and new stainless steel appliances, including a washer and dryer.
Built-in cabinets line the hallway leading to the master suite, where windows look out on the side and rear yards. A white-tiled bathroom has a walk-in glass-and-marble shower, and an additional bedroom is large enough to hold a queen-size bed and a chair.
Outdoor space: The rear patio has ample space for outdoor dining, and a concrete path leads to the garage, which has been partially converted to a living or working space, with its own small patio.
Taxes: $10,279 (estimated)
Contact: Courtney Smith or Kurt Wisner, the Courtney and Kurt Real Estate Team at Compass, 323-667-0700; courtneyandkurt.com