So You Want to Convince a Climate Change Skeptic
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Happy New Year! It’s 2020, and the forecast for this next decade is cloudy with an apprehension of doom. According to the United Nations, the world has only until 2030 to cut carbon dioxide emissions down to roughly half those of 2010 levels to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, the more ambitious target of the Paris Agreement. (The world has already warmed by about 1 degree Celsius since the 19th century.) The outlook, in the words of a United Nations report released in November, is “bleak.”
Daunting as the problem may be, millions of people still don’t accept the premise of its existence: Depending on how you ask, only about half to two-thirds of Americans believe that climate change is caused by humans, according to the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg Public Policy Center.
The question: How do you convince someone that climate change is real? Should you even try?
If you want to convince someone about climate change, don’t lead with data, writes Katharine Hayhoe in The Times. Dr. Hayhoe is a climate scientist at Texas Tech University, and she’s also an evangelical Christian, two identities she realized after moving from Canada were “supposed to be entirely incompatible” in the United States. Understanding why that’s the case is crucial when attempting to convert climate change skeptics, she writes, explaining:
In her experience, Dr. Hayhoe has found that the best way to neutralize the partisan charge on climate change is not by appealing to science — which some prominent Republicans, such as Senator Ted Cruz, have cast as a competitor to religion — but by emphasizing shared values. “For some, this could be the well-being of our community,” she writes. “For others, our children; and for fellow Christians, it’s often our faith.”
In such conversations, it may be important to remember how your interlocutor’s values differ from your own. In Vice, Maggie Puniewska points to the moral foundations theory, according to which liberals and conservatives prioritize different ethics: the former compassion, fairness and liberty, the latter purity, loyalty and obedience to authority. Ms. Puniewska writes:
For example, research has found that conservatives are more likely to support a pro-environmental agenda when presented with messages containing themes of patriotism and defending the purity of nature.
For many skeptics, Neha Thirani Bagri has written in Quartz, delineating the myriad potential harms of unmitigated climate change is not an effective strategy. Instead, it can be more productive to illustrate the potential benefits that mitigation may carry. She writes:
People are more likely to listen to a message when it comes from someone they trust, Alexander Maki has argued in The Washington Post, and messages about climate change are no different. “For example,” he writes, “experimental research discovered that when free-market enthusiasts who are concerned about government regulation hear from experts who emphasize how companies are developing climate responses, they are more likely to accept climate science.”
Who makes for the best messenger depends, naturally, on the intended recipient. A study published in Nature in May, for example, found that when it comes to parents, children may be especially effective persuaders:
While leading with data and studies can cause people to shut down, Ms. Puniewska writes, talking about the scientific consensus around climate change in general can help, acting as a kind of gateway to greater trust in the conclusions of climate science. (This rhetorical strategy has found a prominent champion in Greta Thunberg, who implores people to “listen to the scientists” first and foremost.) She explains:
To the extent that a person’s denial of climate change stems from mistrust of science in general, however — 13 percent of Americans have little to no confidence in scientists, according to a 2019 Pew survey — invoking expertise may never bear fruit.
Attempting to convert deniers is not the most productive way to fight climate change, argue Marcus Hedahl and Travis N. Rieder in Georgetown University’s Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal. In their view, climate change is a problem less of individual belief than of collective action, a failure that can be remedied only through public policy. The most efficient route toward enacting such policy, the authors argue, lies not in convincing deniers to believe in climate change but in galvanizing those who already do. They write:
There’s no one way to talk to people about climate change, the Columbia University climate scientist Kate Marvel has written in The Times, “but dialogue, language and mutual respect matter.”
Have you had a successful climate conversation? How did you convince the other person? Email us at debatable@nytimes.com. Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
Watch Katharine Hayhoe’s TED Talk on how to have a discussion about climate change. [TED]
“Actually, Republicans Do Believe in Climate Change,” write social psychologists Leaf Van Boven and David Sherman. [The New York Times]
“How Six Americans Changed Their Minds About Global Warming.” [The New York Times]
Who funds climate change denial? Tik Root, Lisa Friedman and Hiroko Tabuchi follow the money. [The New York Times]
Here’s what readers had to say about the last edition: The 2010s, reviewed.
Vicki: “I’m surprised ‘Moonlight’ wasn’t mentioned as a best film of the decade. I am a straight, white, 50-something-year-old woman who was able to see the world as a gay, black, young man through this film. I’ve enjoyed many films over the years, but this one was simply magic. I was ecstatic to see it win the Best Picture Oscar and it has made me a huge fan of Mahershala Ali.”
Larry: “I am disappointed that none of the four guest commentators mentioned climate change, either as a best book or as an issue that will have major ramifications but isn’t sufficiently appreciated yet. Climate change will most likely change our future more — and for the worse — than any other single phenomenon.”