3 Film Series to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.
THE BONG SHOW at Film at Lincoln Center (Jan. 7-14). A Palme d’Or winner, a box office success story and an Oscar contender, Bong Joon Ho’s “Parasite” was, by any measure, one of 2019’s most significant films. Film at Lincoln Center, which has been screening “Parasite” since October, puts the movie in context: This program has all six of Bong’s previous features and seven that he selected from other directors, with a clear emphasis on paranoia and suspense. It is easy to see how the class tensions in “Deliverance” (showing on Thursday and Jan. 12) and the climate of distrust in John Carpenter’s “The Thing” (on Tuesday and Wednesday) might have influenced “Parasite.” Kiyoshi Kurosawa’s chilling “Cure,” which involves a string of killings, pairs brilliantly with Bong’s “Memories of Murder”; they screen back-to-back (with separate admissions) on Tuesday and Wednesday.
212-875-5601, filmlinc.org
FOREIGN EYES FILMING FRANCE at French Institute Alliance Française (Jan. 7-March 31). In the fall, Japan Society hosted a series on how Tokyo had been filmed by directors who didn’t hail from the city. The same principle applies to this survey of movies set in France, which kicks off with “The Passion of Joan of Arc” (on Tuesday), directed by the Danish filmmaker Carl Theodor Dreyer. On Jan. 14, the theater will screen the German director Christian Petzold’s extraordinary “Transit.” It takes place mainly in Marseille during World War II, although Petzold, who filmed on location, keeps the contemporary cityscapes in full view, calling attention to the story’s parallels in the 21st century.
800-982-2787, fiaf.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
SHOW ME LOVE: INTERNATIONAL TEEN CINEMA at the Museum of Modern Art (through Jan. 19). The title of this series is a tad misleading — “Real Women Have Curves” (on Saturday and Jan. 17), starring America Ferrera as a teenager from East Los Angeles, and “Cooley High” (on Sunday and Jan. 17), shot around the Cabrini-Green housing project in Chicago, don’t remotely qualify as “international.” Rather, what is meant to unite the films in MoMA’s showcase is that they all take original, memorable approaches to portraying adolescence. The range on display includes filmmakers as stark as Ingmar Bergman (who wrote the screenplay for “Torment,” directed by Alf Sjoberg, screening on Saturday and Monday) and as loose and elliptical as Claire Denis (“Nénette and Boni,” on Tuesday and Jan. 18).
212-708-9400, moma.org