The Role of a Career in ‘Fiddler,’ and He Might Even Keep the Beard
Backstage at Joel Grey’s Yiddish-language production of “Fiddler on the Roof,” minutes after its final performance on Sunday night at Stage 42, some actors were already shaving off their beards.
Not Steven Skybell. Behind a dressing-room door labeled Papa (in Yiddish), he was still looking a lot like his own exuberant Tevye, the milkman philosopher whose strong-minded daughters are his joy and torment, and whose shtetl is threatened by increasing anti-Jewish violence.
The last time “Fiddler” was on Broadway, Skybell, 57, spent a few months playing the butcher Lazar Wolf. This Off Broadway production, a hit for the National Yiddish Theater Folksbiene that opened downtown in July 2018 and moved to 42nd Street last February for a commercial run, has been his star turn.
Before he headed across the street for the closing-night party, Skybell lingered, celebratory vodka in hand, to talk about inhabiting a character he had wanted to play professionally for his whole career. These are edited excepts from the conversation.
You’ve been living in Tevye’s head, and he in yours, for how long now?
I played Tevye when I was 17, at Interlochen summer camp. I played him again at Yale undergrad, when I was 21. It’s unusual to have a role that has been banging around in my psyche for 40-plus years. The crazy thing is that my husband saw that they were doing this Yiddish “Fiddler.” It was announced on Facebook. My agent said they’d already offered the role to another Broadway performer, but that person was rethinking the challenge. I said, “Well you tell them, one, I’ve worked with Joel Grey before,” which was true, “and, two, I speak Yiddish,” which wasn’t true. I had studied Yiddish.
He just told me that you spoke beautiful Yiddish, that that’s part of why he cast you.
The greatest accolade of this whole run is when we were downtown, we had to exit through the Museum of Jewish Heritage, and I would have countless Yiddish speakers start spouting to me in Yiddish. But I don’t really speak Yiddish.
How long did you expect the run to last?
Six weeks. The joke is that when I finally was cast in an age-appropriate production, I rolled my eyes and said, “It’s in Yiddish.” Like, “We’re going to be downtown, and who will even see all that hard work?” More celebrities have seen this show, more people from my life — I have had people from kindergarten come from Lubbock, Texas, to see this show. Just last Sunday, Hillary Clinton came.
Has the real-world rise in anti-Semitic acts made the show more emotionally taxing for you?
Emotionally taxing, and rich. We were downtown when the Tree of Life shootings happened. In “If I Were a Rich Man,” Tevye says, “If I were rich, I would have the time to sit in shul.” Even that is not a guarantee that you’re going to be safe. I know history will repeat cycles. But I do think the rhetoric of our times and the rhetoric from the powers that be are only contributing to hateful actions. People are being emboldened in a way that I thought we had moved beyond.
Has being in this production changed you?
Playing Tevye for a year and a half has made me a better actor than I ever thought I could be. It is a masterful book. The greatest challenge is learning how not to lose my voice doing this show eight times a week.
Three-hour show, two-show days. Are you going to miss those?
(Laughs) I think it’s Ethel Merman who said that when you lead a show like this, you basically have the life of a monk. I have loved this from start to finish. However. It was a couple of months ago that they announced the end date, and you start to think: “Oh, I can go to the movies. I can go out to dinner.” I am looking forward to that. And there is life in the old gal yet. There’s plans for a China tour, an Australian tour and a national tour. If it happens, I would be so foolish to turn my back on the opportunity.
As a fitness regimen, how is this show?
Right before I met with them to do this, some neighbors challenged us to a local “Biggest Loser” competition. I lost 50 pounds before the first day of rehearsal. I said to myself, “Just my luck. They’re going to say to me, ‘Hey, you’ve got to put on some weight. You’re playing Tevye.’” But more than once in the script, he says he’s starving. If he’s not dipping into his own cheese, he’s going to be a little less fat than thin. Since I’ve been doing this show, I haven’t darkened the door of a gym. I’m actually anticipating the freshman 10. The show is a beautiful workout.
Will you keep the beard?
I don’t know. I like it. I mean, first performance of “Fiddler” downtown, I probably looked like Moses. It was way too long. And then I was like, “I don’t want to scare people on the street.” No one said I could, but I was like, “I’m trimming it back, because I want to look good.”
Is talking about this making you sad?
Not yet. I really thought I was going to be more of a basket case tonight.
When you came on —
Yeah, that was hard.
There was enormous entrance applause, and it looked like you got a little bit —
I did. That caught me a little bit by surprise. And that of course is very meaningful. Many, many, many celebrated people have played Tevye, and I’m basically an unknown. And to me that’s who Tevye is. I was so happy and used to no entrance applause, because I’m just a guy. No one’s coming to see me. They’re coming to see Joel Grey’s “Fiddler on the Roof” in Yiddish. But of course, tonight was different. I was indeed moved by it, yeah. I have no idea what the future is going to hold for me, but I can’t imagine anything better than this.
Really.
I really cannot. The only thing is, in the best-case scenario, if Steven Spielberg thought, “Let’s do a film version of this production.” For right now, at this moment in time, this is the apex of my career.