What I Learned About Filmmaking From These Oscar Nominees
You can understand a lot about the moviemaking process by diving into one scene. As this awards season comes to a close, I’m looking back on the conversations I had with directors of a handful of the current Oscar nominees for best picture. Each director used one sequence to help me understand the nuances of what brings the film to life. Below are five lessons gleaned from their craft.
Yes, there is plenty of dialogue in Martin Scorsese’s epic “The Irishman.” And yet, much of its dramatic impact comes from characters’ silences. In a conversation with Scorsese, I learned about how much tension can be created through an actor’s expressions and subtle cues, rather than spoken lines.
For a celebration sequence honoring the lead character, Frank Sheeran (Robert De Niro), the director explained that “the structure of the scene is all about the looks.” In one key moment, Frank’s daughter Peggy (Anna Paquin) notices mobsters eyeing the union leader Jimmy Hoffa (Al Pacino), whom they want removed from power. Scorsese said the actress told him while doing the scene, “I never saw looks like that from people.”
With dialogue secondary, Scorsese builds the scene through “the balancing of the editing of the frames, which encompass medium shots, hardly any close-ups,” he said. This allows viewers to see more of the characters’ body language and their environment, which has an impact on their decisions.
In the thriller “Parasite,” the patriarch Kim Ki-taek (Song Kang Ho) says to his son, “You know what plan never fails? No plan at all.” He continues, “With no plan, nothing can go wrong.” While the director Bong Joon Ho meticulously planned his construction of the film, one particular scene took more of an improvisational approach. In that sequence, Ki-taek is rehearsing the lines he will use to manipulate the wealthy family he is working for, while his son, Ki-woo (Choi Woo Shik), coaches him on the lines. The scene is a bit of an inside joke for Korean audiences because Song is a renowned actor in the country, while Choi is an up-and-comer. Bong said, “It’s as if Ansel Elgort is teaching acting to Al Pacino.”
But the director said he shot this part of the scene quickly and had the actors improvise some of the dialogue, to create a kind of “momentary feeling,” which was very important to the spontaneous way parts of the sequence played.
Often in movies, the score is not ready until after production is complete. But for this scene in “Joker,” in which Arthur (Joaquin Phoenix) does a haunting dance in a park bathroom and begins to find his Joker self, the score inspired its direction. Speaking about the moment, the director Todd Phillips said the scene was scripted differently than what was ultimately shot. On the set, he and Phoenix didn’t think the scripted version was working, but Phillips thought about some music he had received from the composer Hildur Gudnadottir. He said he played it for Phoenix, who then started to dance to it organically: “We both kind of looked at each other and said, ‘O.K., that’s the scene.’”
The drama “Marriage Story” begins with two montages, with each of the lead characters (Adam Driver and Scarlett Johansson) discussing what they love about the other person. We see scenes of their domestic life as they talk in voice-over. The writer-director Noah Baumbach said he thought of the sequence “like an overture in a musical. It’s almost like we're establishing all the themes of the movie, before the movie begins.” Although this is the movie’s start, for it to work, Baumbach said it was important to capture people in the middle of moments. He wanted to paint a picture of an ongoing domestic life, which meant setting up and shooting long scenes, only to use a few seconds to capture the emotional beats.
Greta Gerwig’s adaptation of “Little Women" sticks with the novel’s period, but is imbued with lively touches that feel up-to-date. One of those can be found when Jo March (Saoirse Ronan) and Theodore “Laurie” Laurence (Timothée Chalamet) dance together. Because she’s accidentally burned her dress, they’re alone on the porch, bathed in the light of the bigger dance happening behind them.
The choreography by Monica Bill Barnes has a youthful buoyancy that makes it almost float right off the screen. It’s a little punk rock yet a little classic. “I wanted it to feel both totally modern and period accurate,” Gerwig said.
She was inspired by a “Saturday Night Live” sketch with Gilda Radner and Steve Martin that captured the same spirit.
“For our film,” Gerwig said, “we wanted it to be this shimmery moment that feels like maybe it almost didn’t even happen.”