One Startling Scene: Tracy Letts in ‘Ford v Ferrari’
This article contains spoilers for “Ford v Ferrari.”
Tracy Letts gets called on to play a lot of captains of industry and senators, “so you look for the thing that makes it more interesting than just a cipher in a suit,” he said. And burning rubber as Henry Ford II in James Mangold’s “Ford v Ferrari,” about the 1960s Le Mans rivalry with the Italian carmaker Enzo Ferrari, was an enticing prospect.
As Ford, the imposing Letts squeezes into a GT40 with Matt Damon, portraying the racecar driver and designer Carroll Shelby, for a pedal-to-the-metal spin on an airport tarmac. When it’s over, Ford, seemingly on the verge of laughter, breaks into full-throttle sobs that go on and on. And on. I asked Letts to explain his thought process behind each beat of the scene. With help from Mangold, the director, he discussed their hellbent ride. Here are excerpts from the conversation.
Tracy Letts: “When I read the script, it was clear that this was one of the highlights. The story of ‘Ford v Ferrari’ hinges on Ford’s insecurity, the idea that he got his feelings hurt by Ferrari, and that’s why he decided to take him on at Le Mans. And so the scene for me was a way to show that insecurity as well as to illustrate the tremendous amount of pressure to keep up the family name. I just thought it so beautifully and hilariously illustrated those things.”
James Mangold: “The sheer power and intensity of riding in [the car with Shelby] alters the entire course of their relationship, and it’s almost like a sex scene. There was an emotionality revealed in a character that had been almost entirely a mask.”
A specially rigged GT40 was mounted with a pod called the Biscuit that would be driven by a professional driver, Robert Nagle, the director explained, adding that Damon was miming driving as the speed approached 100 mph. Mangold said that instead of having Letts start right in on the scene, he suggested that “they spin out, do a doughnut and then he start in his own time.”
Letts: “The speed didn’t bother me, but it was very claustrophobic and I’m claustrophobic. I’m 6-3, and you have to go in feet first and spider-crawl into the car. You’re about 18 inches off the ground, nearly completely horizontal, in a period suit, makeup, hair, then I’ve got to have a seatbelt on. The roof is not far above my head, I can’t open the door, I can’t open the window, the glass is right here and then Matt, who’s not a small guy, gets in next to me and closes the door. That part was scary.”
“You ready?” Shelby asks Ford before the start of their ride. “I was born ready, Mr. Shelby,” Ford smugly replies. “Hit it.” But as Shelby picks up speed and careens down the tarmac, Ford begins to scream like a terrified child, clutching the dashboard for dear life.
Letts: “That was very easy. You just scream like you’re on a ride because you are. I remember that in one of the takes, my door came open. There’s the ground, whizzing by at 100 miles an hour. I screamed: ‘Door! Door!’ and closed the door.”
“I was greatly relieved that I was going to have the adrenaline of the ride before acting the scene rather than just going, All right, pretend that the car has been driven and now, ‘Action.’ He’s a very generous actor, Matt. We’re all out there with a common purpose, which is what’s the best way to tell this story, not about what’s the way that can feature me.”
Once the car stops, Ford breaks into uncontrollable sobs that threaten to never end. And he laments the fact that his father isn’t around to witness his accomplishment at having built a racecar that could rival a Ferrari.
Letts: “A lot of it’s just adrenaline and sense memory and that actory kind of stuff. I mean, the lines about his dad were not a big substitution for me. I was very close to my dad. He died about 11 years ago and so to talk about how I wish my dad could see this was very personal. And I thought it was a beautiful moment in the script.”
How long to sob “was not spelled out in the script, and I don’t think we talked about it. But I’m an actor and a writer, and Jim’s a writer and a director, and we’ve both done this a long time. We know basically how long a beat like that is going to live.”
“I intentionally didn’t want to watch the movie until I watched it with an audience,” Letts said, “because we made it for an audience, and I loved hearing response throughout. I don’t particularly like watching myself on film. But I was thrilled to see that the scene worked as well as we kind of felt it worked that day.”