A Challenge for the Trial: 100 Senators Who Love to Talk, Sitting in Silence
WASHINGTON — In the Senate, few things are of more value to a lawmaker than the sound of his or her own voice.
Inside the gilded chamber, senators vocalize their votes, calling out “aye” or “nay.” They make speeches on all manner of subjects — meaty policy addresses, weekly odes to exemplary constituents, even acknowledgments of wedding anniversaries — haggle over legislation and generally sound off to their hearts’ content.
So President Trump’s impeachment trial poses a unique and particularly onerous challenge for the 100 senators of the 116th Congress: a daily vow of silence for the duration of the proceedings that is in effect beginning at 1 p.m. and sometimes long into the night.
Senators are confined to their desks, forced to stash their cellphones in cubbies and barred from speaking, even in hushed tones, as the seven House impeachment managers and Mr. Trump’s defense team debate whether the president committed high crimes and misdemeanors.
“Every senator will have some trouble — we are not, by nature, silent,” said Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri and the chairman of the Senate Rules Committee. “The desire to hear the sound of your own voice will be frustrated by that rule.”
To remind them, sessions of the trial will begin each afternoon with the Senate sergeant-at-arms intoning the same dramatic command uttered in 1868 at the nation’s first presidential impeachment trial: “All persons are commanded to keep silence, on pain of imprisonment.” (There is no record of a Senate forcing jail time on one of its own.)
It is a harsh reality for a typically talkative group. Matters of grave historical importance aside, they are unaccustomed to limitations on their ability to chat with colleagues, peruse the selections in the designated candy desk (carefully chosen by Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania) or, in the words of Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas, noisily “mill around like cattle” in the chamber’s well.
On Tuesday, the first formal day of the trial, the rule was already starting to chafe. Senators began to resemble high school students waiting for the bell. Notes were subtly passed between desks. Fingernails were examined, and then bitten.
Senator David Perdue, Republican of Georgia, used a binder to hide a whispered aside to Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, seated at the neighboring desk. Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 2 Republican, appeared to sneak a glance at the smart watch on his wrist. Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont independent seeking the Democratic nomination for president, folded a piece of paper torn from his notepad. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, stifled a yawn as she jotted notes. And about four hours into the trial, late Tuesday afternoon, Senator James Risch, Republican of Idaho, appeared to succumb to the hush and briefly fell asleep, slumped slightly in his chair with his head resting on his right hand.
As the debate over Democratic amendments dragged into the night, senators grew even more visibly frustrated as leadership failed to strike a deal on limiting the number of amendment votes. Even as the session began again, shortly before 10 p.m., a handful of senators were slow to return to their seats. Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, temporarily sat down in a Republican senator’s chair to chat with Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina.
Vows of silence can be fungible in the Senate of 2020. While Mr. Cruz sat (mostly) closelipped on the Senate floor on Tuesday, his official Twitter account was among the senatorial accounts tweeting, drawing swift accusations from critics that he was breaking the rules. In a cheeky response, the senator’s account posted a doctored version of the Texas “Come and Take It” flag — with a cellphone replacing the cannon that normally appears — although an aide later confirmed that it was the staff, not Mr. Cruz, who was controlling his Twitter feed.
Still, senators appeared concerned about the prospect of keeping their mouths shut for a trial that promised to stretch for two weeks or more.
“Would that be a record for you, sitting in silence for that amount of time?” Mr. Roberts asked Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, as the pair — both veterans of President Bill Clinton’s impeachment trial in 1999 — rode together recently on the Senate subway.
“My staff would probably say it’d be a record for me,” Mr. Roberts added.
The oath of silence “on pain of imprisonment” while receiving articles of impeachment dates to 1798, when the Senate adopted impeachment rules for the trial of Senator William Blount of Tennessee, according to information provided by the Senate Historical Office. The charges were dismissed after the Senate concluded that the remedy of impeachment did not extend to his case, but the vow stuck through multiple revisions.
Asked about the limitations, Senator James Lankford, Republican of Oklahoma, joked that “all of us are taking bets on Lindsey Graham,” a garrulous lawmaker who spent the Clinton trial as an impeachment manager, making the case that the president should be removed from office for lying under oath about an affair with a White House intern.
“That’s the only one I really know of that I’m really worried about for six hours,” Mr. Lankford said of Mr. Graham.
Other veterans from Mr. Clinton’s impeachment trial recalled occasionally bristling under the verbal restrictions, even when they were able to take breaks to go to the bathroom or relax in the cloakroom, a private lounge just off the Senate floor.
“It’s common sense, that if you’re going to be a trier of facts, you have to listen to what the facts are,” said James W. Ziglar, who served as the Senate sergeant-at-arms during the Clinton trial, pointing to similar limitations imposed on traditional court juries.
Though he did not have to eject any senator for illegal chatter, Mr. Ziglar noted, “it’s hard as dickens to keep 100 senators from talking.”
Back in 1999, Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, remembered subtly passing notes to a neighboring senator, Tim Hutchinson, then a freshman Republican from Arkansas, with occasional thoughts until, she said, she got too nervous about getting caught.
“It’s very natural for senators to want to comment on arguments that are being made,” Ms. Collins said in an interview. “And it’s very natural for us to want to have this ongoing commentary with our neighbors while we’re sitting there.”
“And that was before cellphones were prevalent,” she added. “This will be an unusually difficult challenge.”
The restrictions on device usage and talking are akin to the rules placed on a jury in a courtroom. If senators have questions and motions, they are to submit them in writing to Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., who is presiding over the trial. And when the Senate goes into closed session for debate, the chamber-controlled cameras will turn off — meaning there will be no public viewing of the proceedings.
There are advantages to the vow of silence, some senators said, arguing that the controlled environment would help them focus and allow them to better digest the nuances of the arguments being made by both the House prosecution and the White House defense.
“We have to listen,” said Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington and a veteran of the Clinton trial. “We have to hear the evidence, and that’s what we’ll do.”
And at least one of the less technologically dependent senators appeared to be mildly delighted at the opportunity for silence.
“I sit on a tractor for 18 hours a day and my cellphone doesn’t work — this is like heaven to me,” Senator Jon Tester, Democrat of Montana and a farmer, said, chuckling, in a recent interview. “I think it’s going to be really interesting, and not having a cellphone is like — that’s my dream job.”
“I hope this is a case that everybody takes this very, very, very seriously,” he added, his voice growing solemn. “The truth is, this is serious business.”