Gracie Terzian, Jeffrey Emanuel
Grace Benedict Paine Terzian and Jeffrey Howard Emanuel were married Jan. 11 at UVA Inn at Darden in Charlottesville, Va. William N. Marshall Sr., the chief deputy sheriff in Charlottesville, officiated with George C. Paine II, an uncle of the bride, leading the ceremony.
Ms. Terzian, 28, who goes by Gracie, is a singer, songwriter, and harp ukulelist based in Manhattan. In December, she appeared at Rockwood Music Hall in Manhattan, where she played harp ukulele, accompanied by a double bass and violin. She has released two albums, “Bells & White Branches” (Aima Records, 2019) and “Saints and Poets” (2015). She graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is the daughter of Grace Paine Terzian and Philip Terzian of Oakton, Va. The bride’s father is a freelance journalist focusing on politics, culture and foreign policy in Washington, and is a contributing writer to “The Washington Examiner.” He is the author of “Architects of Power: Roosevelt, Eisenhower, and the American Century” (Encounter Books). Her mother works in Arlington, Va., as the director of development marketing at the Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University.
Mr. Emanuel, 37, is an analyst at Millennium Management, a hedge fund in Manhattan. He graduated from Reed College in Portland, Ore.
He is a son of Marilyn D. Emanuel and Steven L. Emanuel of Larchmont, N.Y. His mother was a stay-at-home parent. His father is the founder and principal author of Emanuel Law Outlines, a series of law school study aids now published by Wolters Kluwer Legal Education.
The couple were introduced in 2017 through the Hinge dating app. A couple of days later they met for drinks at Hotel Delmano in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where Mr. Emanuel impressed Ms. Terzian by rattling off a few sonnets by Shakespeare. Mr. Terzian, who loved opera and classical music, said he was determined to meet someone with singing ability, while Ms. Terzian wanted to meet someone who could put up with her erratic performance schedule, and didn’t mind all the musical instruments hanging on her walls.