3 Film Series to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.
AMERICAN INDIES, 1980-1989 at the Museum of Modern Art (through Feb. 2). The way this retrospective tells it, the 1980s represented a transformational period in American independent cinema — a time when indies served as a counterbalance to the mallification of Hollywood movies and before they started to become commodified by organizations such as the Sundance Film Festival (now underway). The decade gave rise to the first triumphs of the Coen brothers (“Blood Simple,” on Friday and Feb. 1) and Jim Jarmusch (“Stranger Than Paradise,” on Saturday and Jan. 31); it also yielded punk-infused anarchic experiments like Lizzie Borden’s “Born in Flames” (on Saturday and Feb. 1) and nuanced portraits of African-American life (Charles Burnett’s “My Brother’s Wedding,” on Saturday and Wednesday; Billy Woodberry’s “Bless Their Little Hearts,” on Tuesday).
212-708-9400, moma.org
HAL HARTLEY at the Metrograph (Jan. 24-Feb. 2). A mechanic who doesn’t drive, a professed nymphomaniac who hasn’t had sex, a garbage man who turns out to be a great poet of the times — welcome to Hartley’s absurdist world, still as fresh and funny as it was when he was being hailed as the “Jean-Luc Godard of Long Island” in the 1990s. Hartley will appear at multiple screenings, beginning with Friday’s 6:30 p.m. show of his debut feature, “The Unbelievable Truth,” starring Robert John Burke (as the aforementioned ex-con mechanic, who became skilled at his trade while imprisoned for reasons that nobody can quite keep straight) and the sorely missed Adrienne Shelly (as a whip-smart high schooler convinced that humanity is doomed).
212-660-0312, metrograph.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
HOMAGE TO ANNA KARINA at Film Forum (through Jan. 30). The theater presents a tribute to the legendary French New Wave actress, who died in December. It leans heavily on her brilliant collaborations with Jean-Luc Godard, to whom she was wife and muse during his most celebrated period. Catch her in full splashy color in Godard’s hat tip to 1950s American musicals (“A Woman Is a Woman,” on Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Jan. 30) and in his wide-screen version of a lovers-on-the-lam film (“Pierrot le Fou,” on Friday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Jan. 30). The lineup also has Karina in two films by other directors: Jacques Rivette (“La Religeuse,” on Friday, Saturday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday) and Rainer Werner Fassbinder (“Chinese Roulette,” on Sunday and Wednesday).
212-727-8110, filmforum.org