‘The Outsider’ Brings a Faceless Terror, and Stephen King, to HBO
In an opening sequence that’s about as grisly as they come, the mutilated body of an 11-year-old boy is found in the woods, deep in white suburban Georgia. As the evidence mounts, it points to one man only, but the case is far from closed.
From the standard setup, viewers of HBO’s dark new crime drama “The Outsider,” which debuts Jan. 12, might expect a more standard police procedural to follow. But anyone who has read the 2018 Stephen King novel on which “The Outsider” is based — or read anything by King — knows there is probably more to the story.
At least that much is clear by the pilot’s end, if little else: The suspect, a Little League coach named Terry Maitland, appears to have been in two places at once, 60 miles apart. He is somehow, irreconcilably, both innocent and guilty. And so, a fairly predictable opening spins quickly into a complex metaphysical inquiry that is also a poignant social allegory — as much “Twin Peaks” as “True Detective.”
What if the unspeakable evil is both outside us and of us? And where do we turn when all logic fails?
“No matter what you do, how smart you are, there comes a point in life when people have to return to some kind of belief system that defies their rational brain,” said Richard Price, who wrote and developed the 10-episode series. His name practically synonymous with the kind of gritty realism that defines modern crime drama — his TV credits include “The Wire,” “The Deuce” and “The Night Of,” which he created — Price acknowledged that in the real world, realism has limits.
Sometimes, as he put it, “The world is just too much.”
“The Outsider” is hardly the first screen adaptation of King’s work — there were at least five last year alone. But it’s the first from HBO. Reviews for the novel were overwhelmingly positive, and producers assembled the literary talent to match the occasion, pairing Price with his fellow crime novelist Dennis Lehane (“Mystic River,” “Gone, Baby, Gone”), who co-wrote the series’s second half.
As the series and investigation build, so does an underlying tension between the empirical and the supernatural. Working with ironclad physical evidence, Detective Ralph Anderson, played by Ben Mendelsohn, very conspicuously arrests Coach Terry during a Little League game. But then equally solid evidence emerges placing Terry at a faraway teacher’s conference at the time of the murder.
Fact gets pitted against faith, testing the limits of Ralph’s allegiance to the material world. Jason Bateman, who plays Terry and directed the first two episodes, said the story was born for boundary-pushing TV.
“I love what he’s able to do with communicating dread, and mood, and the plot engines that he puts out,” he said of King. Still, he felt that “The Outsider” stood out, even for a writer whose work had been adapted dozens of times. “This wasn’t straight genre.”
The project accrued star power early. The producer Marty Bowen approached Price to write the script, which the studio Media Rights Capital then brought together with Bateman and Mendelsohn. (All four are executive producers of the series.) M.R.C. produces the Netflix hillbilly noir series “Ozark,” for which Bateman won a directing Emmy, and the studio felt he had a proven record in creating the kind of unnameable, spine-tingling terror Price’s script required.
Bateman said he had believed that a network with HBO’s history “wouldn’t look at me sideways” for pitching a story that blended the realism and fantasy. Casey Bloys, HBO’s president of programming, agreed: It was “an easy yes.”
“We are pitched a lot of projects, so a few things here stood out to me,” Bloys said in an email. Of course it already had Bateman, Mendelsohn and Price. But this particular King tale was especially appealing.
“I liked that it’s a grounded approach to a really dark, supernatural story,” he said. “That’s not an easy tone to bring to life.”
Bringing King’s story to screen, in turn, presented new challenges for the creative minds assembled. Bateman had never done horror. Neither had Price, the series’s showrunner. “I’m very comfortable writing about the police brain,” Price said, “but I’ve always wanted to write something scary.”
King’s story provided just the opportunity, teeming with elements of the unearthly: doppelgängers, chilling late-night visitations, psychic intuitions. Ralph is a hard-boiled type straight out of something Price might have written himself. But the situation he finds himself in is not.
“Detectives believe and make judgments upon what they see,” Price said. “And then you’re asking this cop to say, O.K., forget the Age of Reason, we have to go backward to the Age of Faith.”
Then there was the challenge of adapting one of the world’s most famous living writers. Loyalists to King’s “Mr. Mercedes” trilogy will recognize the recurring character Holly Gibney, a psychically gifted but socially stunted private detective whom Ralph’s team hires to help solve the unsolvable. But she arrives to Price’s “Outsider” with a few significant changes.
“Holly pre-existed this show,” Price said. “She’s kind of withdrawn, timid and then intrepid. And I decided I needed to make her more gifted in her eccentricities.”
More significant, perhaps, was Price’s fresh take on her background. In the TV adaptation of the trilogy, Holly was from Ohio and played by Justine Lupe, who is white. In “The Outsider,” she’s from Chicago and is played by the Tony-winning British actress Cynthia Erivo, who is black.
King said he had full confidence in Price’s screenwriting — “I trusted him completely,” he said in a recent phone interview — but when Price suggested changing Holly’s name to avoid confusion, King said he had wanted to preserve her identity for the sake of continuity.
“I did insist that the character be Holly Gibney,” King said. “Whether she’s white or black makes no difference to me.”
King added: “Richard kind of skewed the character a different way, so that she’s more O.C.D. than insecure, and that’s fine; it’s another way to go at it.” Watching the screeners, it took King a while to adjust, he said. But “by the time I got to Episode 5 or 6, I was like, Yeah, that’s Holly.”
The job was new territory for Erivo, too, whose previous roles — including in the 2018 Steve McQueen thriller “Widows” and her Golden Globe-nominated performance in “Harriet” — have often required her to rely more on her body, on the part of her strength that was physical.
“What was fun about this was that I had to find the light inside her,” she said. “I had to use different tools. It’s about the way she responds to things with her eyes, those minute details that show something is happening internally.”
Erivo pointed to the “odd combination of things in her character” as what made Holly most alluring — her perceptiveness but also her persuasiveness, even her awkwardness.
“Her communication skills are just different,” she added. “As a black woman, I’m always looking for women who are different, whom you don’t get to hear from that often.”
Bateman said he knew from the moment the casting director, Alexa Fogel, recommended Erivo that she was the right choice. “I was blown away with her presence,” he said. “I thought, that kind of self-assuredness is perfect for what this character needs to push Ralph and make him open to what, until now, he’s been unwilling to accept.”
Another crucial discrepancy between script and novel lends grievous weight to Ralph’s struggle: In the series, his son, whom Terry coached, has also died, before the story begins. (In the novel he is away at summer camp.) The personal anger the investigator feels toward the suspect compromises his professionalism, clouds his judgment.
“He really is quite damaged,” Mendelsohn said, “and I also think he ends up being damaging to the case in a way.”
Price said he made the decision for the sake of emotional build. “I wanted to give Ralph a deeper stake in the unknowable,” he said. “The part of him that surrenders to the Age of Faith asks, ‘If this creature can be real, is there a possibility that I can ever see my son again?’”
King called the change “the cherry on top of the sundae.” For Bateman, his task was to communicate the ways in which Ralph’s grief complicates his foothold in reality.
“You go through the perspective of Ralph, and he’s us,” Bateman said. The policeman in Ralph finds Holly’s theories quixotic, but the father in him wonders if the fantasy might bring him one step closer to his son.
“How do we communicate that to the audience?” Bateman asked. “Is it close-ups of his face as he’s trying to process this weird information? And how does it start to penetrate him emotionally, spiritually and practically as he’s investigating things?”
As a theme, the story’s focus on the outsider has particular resonance amid today’s climate of division and alienation, of our persistent fear of “the other,” of lone wolves. An unknown horror seems to stalk its victims from without but also from within. Terry’s wife and daughters are ostracized for a crime they didn’t commit. Ralph feels socially estranged by his deep sense of loss. Holly is, in Mendelsohn’s words, a “profound outsider” because of “her extraordinary gifts, and the terrible burden of her psychological state.”
In their own ways, none of these characters quite belong. No one is safe from being cast out.
“In Western democracy, these questions of outsider-ness, or otherness, are pervasive,” Mendelsohn said. So if these 10 episodes frighten you, he added, then good: “We need to become aware of the horror, as it were.”
