House Hunting in Amsterdam: A Restored Triplex for $1.9 Million
This six-bedroom, two-bathroom townhouse triplex is in the leafy, upscale Weesperzijde residential neighborhood of Amsterdam, on the eastern bank of the Amstel river, near the heart of the city. The home includes the bottom three levels of a five-level house: a basement level, garden level and first floor. The two floors above contain apartments with separate entrances and are not included in the sale.
Built in 1901 and renovated in 2000, the home has a private yard in the back and another in the front that extends to the street, a rarity in Amsterdam, where homes are typically flush with the sidewalk or have minimal yards, said the owner, Samantha Destrée. “A front garden is an anomaly — very, very rare,” she said.
The front door opens to a long, tiled hall that stretches to the back of the house. On the left are the living and dining rooms; on the right are a half bathroom and a staircase leading down to the basement and up to the second floor.
The north-facing living room has 10-foot ceilings, large windows overlooking the front garden and an original fireplace updated with a gas connection. The adjoining dining room, which can be closed off from the living room with folding doors, has a restored antique chandelier, a second fireplace and open shelving separating it from the kitchen.
The kitchen is in the rear of the house, attached to a sunny breakfast room with built-in shelving. Large glass doors open to a broad terrace with seating areas and, beyond, to the back garden. The kitchen has red cabinetry and a Belgian stone counter that is open to the breakfast area.
On the second floor, the master bedroom has wide-plank floors, a wall of windows and a balcony overlooking the back garden. An adjacent second bedroom has been used as an office, and a third is at the stair landing. The upstairs bedrooms share a hall toilet and a separate room with a shower, tub and twin sinks.
The basement level has three bedrooms, two storage rooms and a shower room. One room could be converted into a full bathroom, Ms. Destrée said.
The Weesperzijde neighborhood, about a mile south of Amsterdam’s center, is home to “a mix of young, hip professionals and families,” she said, as well as shops, cafes and schools. The venerated De Hoop rowing club is down the street, on the riverfront.
“Many people have boats, as the river is so close by (moorings are available a few minutes’ bike ride from the house), and it connects with the city canals or to great swimming spots outside the city,” Ms. Destrée wrote in an email.
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is about 25 minutes away by car or public transportation.
Amsterdam is the capital of the Netherlands and the country’s largest city, with about 875,000 residents. It has seen increasing home prices in recent years, although the growth slowed a bit in 2019. Data collected by Statistics Netherlands, the government’s national statistics agency, showed that the average home sale price in 2019 was 484,995 euros ($535,000), a 5 percent increase over 2018, following increases of about 13 percent year-over-year in 2017 and 2018.
Amsterdam is also the country’s most expensive city, according to a 2019 report by Dutch Rabobank, which found that the average sale price there in the second quarter of the year was 25 percent higher than in Utrecht and 67 percent higher than in Rotterdam, the second-largest city.
Kees Kemp, an agent-owner at the local Broersma Estate Agency, described Amsterdam as “booming” and “very international,” in an email. “The demand is very high, as the number of citizens is rising fast,” he wrote.
With development struggling to keep pace, “the market in Amsterdam is under pressure,” said Tjerk van der Linden, a managing director of Engel & Völkers Amsterdam. Among other factors, Mr. van der Linden and other agents pointed to the arrival of foreign companies that have moved their headquarters to Amsterdam because of concerns related to the Brexit referendum in Britain.
The influx of foreign businesses and buyers has some calling the Dutch capital the new London, although Pieter Joep van den Brink, the founder and broker of Vandenbrink, the Christie’s affiliate in Amsterdam, said the comparison is not entirely apt. Amsterdam may be vying to become Europe’s next financial center, he said, but the real estate market is behaving differently than London’s because people are primarily buying to homes to live in, rather than as investments.
Agents also said that new supply is limited as a result of recent government regulations aimed at curtailing nitrogen emissions, which have restricted the rate of new construction.
“The result is that the old and less popular neighborhoods of Amsterdam are becoming more and more expensive,” said Jim Reerink, the owner of Netherlands Sotheby’s International Realty. “There is a clear increase in single-person households and student accommodation. Also in the luxury segment there is a shift to even more luxury through concierge and other service facilities.”
Homes priced below 1 million euros ($1.1 million) sell fast, Mr. Kemp said, often in a matter of weeks and at up to 60 or 70 percent above asking price.
There is some new development in the city. High-rise developments have gone up in the Amsterdam North and Amstelkwartier neighborhoods, Mr. Kemp said, and IJburg, a series of man-made islands along the northeastern waterfront, promises thousands of new homes.
The city center, with its canals and bridges, remains popular, but “we see an increasing number of buyers who find the center too busy and touristy,” Mr. van der Linden said, pointing to limited parking and scarce affordable housing.
Instead, buyers are moving farther afield — into the Zuidas business district, for example, which has evolved into a neighborhood “with many international people,” Mr. van der Linden said. Buyers are also discovering areas outside the city, including Haarlem, Heemstede, Amstelveen and The Hague.
Prices of luxury homes can range from 10,000 to 20,000 euros a square meter ($1,025 to $2,050 a square foot), Mr. Reerink said. The Valerius development project, for buyers 55 and older, currently under construction in Amsterdam South, will be priced from 15,000 euros to more than 25,000 euros a square meter ($1,500 to $2,700 a square foot), he said.
Mr. Reerink said about half of his agency’s clients are foreign buyers from other European countries, as well as the United States, China, Russia and India.
Mr. van den Brink said his agency’s foreign buyers are often the spouse or partner of a Dutch citizen.
Mr. van der Linden said almost half of his agency’s clients are from other countries, including Britain, Germany, the United States, France and Italy.
There are no restrictions on foreigners buying real estate in the Netherlands.
Transactions are handled by a notary, Mr. Reerink said, although buyers and sellers may also retain their own lawyers. The buyer pays a 2 percent transfer tax based on the sale price, and the notary’s fee is approximately 0.5 percent to 1 percent of the sale price. The notary’s service incurs a value added tax of 21 percent, he said.
The real estate commission is typically 1 to 2 percent of the sale price. Agents aren’t shared by buyer and seller, Mr. van den Brink said.
Dutch; euro (1 euro = $1.10)
The annual taxes on this property were about 940 euros ($1,040) in 2019, Ms. Destrée said.
Eppo Henselijn, De Graaf & Groot, 011-31-20-662-7140; degraafengroot.nl