New & Noteworthy
KINGDOMTIDE, by Rye Curtis. (Little, Brown, $28.) Cloris Waldrip is 72 and spunky when she survives a plane crash in rugged Montana; this impressive novel tells her story and that of the ranger searching for her. “I am the greatest mystery to myself,” Cloris declares.
WILL, by Will Self. (Grove, $26.) In his first memoir, the British novelist looks unsparingly at his youthful drug use — by his 20s, Self was in the grips of a heroin habit — followed by his journey through rehab. “Isn’t life all about going through the motions,” he asks late in the book, “the getting up and the lying down?”
THE FIXERS: The Bottom-Feeders, Crooked Lawyers, Gossipmongers, and Porn Stars Who Created the 45th President, by Joe Palazzolo and Michael Rothfeld. (Random House, $28.) The authors, who won a Pulitzer for revealing President Trump’s hush money payments to Stormy Daniels, here look at his network of fixers.
DENALI: A Man, a Dog, and the Friendship of a Lifetime, by Ben Moon. (Penguin, paper, $17.) Moon, a wilderness adventure photographer, expands on his viral short film from 2015, paying tribute to the dog who helped him through cancer before succumbing to the disease himself.
SERIOUS NOTICING: Selected Essays, 1997-2019, by James Wood. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $30.) Two decades of insight from a top literary critic, including previously collected essays as well as work for The New Yorker and others.
One of my colleagues is always game to talk about food: how to properly brine a Judy Bird turkey, fantasy league drafts for “The Great British Bake Off,” the sabayon recipe she found in a dog-eared edition of a cookbook called “Cream, Butter & Wine.” One day, amid a discussion of the many geographic and cultural variations of fried chicken, she was reminded of Mark Kurlansky, a writer whose dense tomes on cod, milk, oysters and other delicious subjects often become best sellers. I picked up SALT: A World History, his exhaustive, academic review of the mineral’s influence. It jumps in the first three pages alone from Spanish Catalonia to Jungian psychology to Abyssinian hospitality customs to sexual and marital superstitions in Egypt and Europe. The supply of dinner party trivia will likely last me decades. Did you know that members of the Roman army were sometimes paid in salt, which is where “salary,” “worth his salt” and “soldier” originate?
—Tiffany Hsu, business reporter