4 Film Series to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.
DOC FORTNIGHT 2020 at the Museum of Modern Art (through Feb. 19). One of New York City’s biggest documentary showcases brings films straight from Park City, Utah, where the Sundance Film Festival concluded on Saturday. “Film About a Father Who” (on Tuesday and Feb. 14), shown at the parallel event Slamdance, is actually partly set in that ski town; in it, the filmmaker Lynne Sachs creates a layered cinematic essay about being the daughter of the “Hugh Hefner of Park City.” The program will also feature the great Japanese documentarian Kazuo Hara (the subject of a retrospective at MoMA last year and a favorite of Errol Morris and Michael Moore) and the first United States screening of his “Reiwa Uprising” (on Wednesday), a four-hour portrait of a transgender professor’s political campaign in Japan. And a recurring theme in this year’s Doc Fortnight is violence against women, a topic in films like “Overseas” (on Sunday and Feb. 13), about Filipinas training to be housekeepers in other countries.
212-708-9400, moma.org
DREAMED PATHS: THE FILMS OF ANGELA SCHANELEC at Film at Lincoln Center (Feb. 7-13). In preparation for the Feb. 14 release of “I Was at Home, But …,” shown at last fall’s New York Film Festival and screening in a preview on Friday night, Film at Lincoln Center will ease viewers into the world of Schanelec, a German director associated with what has been called the Berlin School of filmmakers. But unlike her counterparts in the movement, who tend to traffic in hard-edge classicism, Schanelec imbues her movies with an enigmatic logic all their own. (More than one of her films could have been called “The Dreamed Path,” a feature showing on Sunday and Wednesday.) Schanelec, who will appear at multiple screenings, also selected a handful of films by other directors, like “I’m Going Home” (on Sunday and Wednesday), Manoel de Oliveira’s rueful portrait of an aging actor, and “We Won’t Grow Old Together” (on Saturday and Wednesday), Maurice Pialat’s chronicle of the end of a relationship.
212-875-5601, filmlinc.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
‘MOZART IN LOVE’ AND THE CINEMA OF MARK RAPPAPORT at Anthology Film Archives (Feb. 7-18). A biopic only in the loosest sense, the 1975 film “Mozart in Love” (showing in this series on Friday, Saturday and Feb. 15) is a minimalist portrait of the composer that makes few feints at verisimilitude. A new restoration anchors Anthology’s retrospective on Rappaport, an independent director also known for experimental essay documentaries like “Rock Hudson’s Home Movies” (on Feb. 13 and 16), which sifts through clips of Hudson’s performances to show that the actor’s homosexuality was hidden in plain sight, and “From the Journals of Jean Seberg” (on Feb. 13 and 16), which casts Mary Beth Hurt as the actress looking back on her life.
212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.org
VISIONS OF RESISTANCE: RECENT FILMS BY BRAZILIAN WOMEN DIRECTORS at the Museum of the Moving Image (Feb. 8-9). This series provides a snapshot of women making movies in Brazil at a time when the country is undergoing a lurch far to the right under Jair Bolsonaro. The documentary “Block” (on Saturday) captures a truck drivers’ strike that illustrates political attitudes in the run-up to Bolsonaro’s election. The dramatic feature “Coffee With Cinnamon” (on Sunday) won praise in Brazil, according to the museum, for its portrait of the country’s black middle class.
718-784-0077, movingimage.us