What to Cook This Weekend
Good morning. Tejal Rao has a great piece in The Times this week about jingalov hats, skillet-cooked Armenian flatbreads stuffed with herbs and greens. Yes, there’s a lot of washing and drying and chopping of leaves to make them, but the dough’s a snap and, in all, the recipe (above) is just the sort of thing to bring peace and joy to a weekend’s cooking. Please give that a try on Saturday: Dinner enveloped. It doesn’t need anything on the side.
For this evening, I’m thinking, you might try Alison Roman’s new recipe for white bean stew with broccoli rabe. Or Alexa Weibel’s new recipe for vegan cacio e pepe.
Breakfast tomorrow: skillet greens with runny eggs, peas and pancetta. And sloppy Joes for lunch. You’ll eat more greens for dinner, after all.
More eggs on Sunday: Benedict on English muffins, with smoked salmon playing the role of Canadian bacon. That and a Vietnamese iced coffee? It’s a deadly combination. Cue up “Virgin River” on Netflix after, and space out for a couple of hours on the couch.
Then get your dinner sorted: I’m thinking a double batch of buttermilk fried chicken so that there are leftovers next week, along with mashed potatoes and pickleback slaw. (Extra credit: Use some of the cooking fat and your dredging flour to make a roux in a separate pot, then add milk to make gravy, seasoned to taste.)
There are many, many more recipes to cook this weekend waiting for you on NYT Cooking, at least once you’ve taken out a subscription to our site and apps. (Citrus salad with peanuts and avocado, anyone? Maybe a big ol’ roast beef with which to make sandwiches next week?) Thanks for your support.
We are on Facebook, of course. And on Instagram, too. We write about the news on Twitter. And we upload a lot of gems to YouTube, including Alison Roman making baked ziti for the win. Please like and subscribe. I’m working up a series of A.S.M.R. mukbang videos for later this year.
And if you get stuck up a recipe river without a whisk, just ask us for help. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com. We will get back to you.
Now, it doesn’t have anything to do with roast goose or seitan roulade, but you should read this 2016 essay by Anna Wiener in n+1. Her book-length version of it, “Uncanny Valley: A Memoir,” will be released Jan. 14.
Hot take: The only really good moments in “The Irishman” were Joe Pesci and Robert DeNiro dipping lard bread in wine. (In the seminaries, they call that intinction.)
Remember the 2010s? The Times put together 33 ways to do so and it’s a remarkable thing. Please noodle around in there. Read and watch.
But not so much that you don’t have time for Liza Minnelli and Pet Shop Boys, “Losing My Mind,” live on the BBC in 1989. You’re welcome. See you on Sunday!