Top Education Official Planned to Meet Boy for Sex, Prosecutors Say
David Hay was a high-ranking official with the New York City Department of Education when he went on a dating app last July and found someone named Colton, whom Mr. Hay believed to be a 14-year-old boy living in a small Wisconsin city, federal prosecutors said.
He began sending sexually explicit messages, the prosecutors said on Friday, and made plans to meet the minor to engage in sexual activity.
But Colton was, in fact, an undercover police officer, and Mr. Hay was charged in federal court on Friday with trying to entice a minor for sexual activity.
If convicted, Mr. Hay, who served as deputy chief of staff to schools chancellor Richard A. Carranza, faces a mandatory 10-year prison term and up to life.
Mr. Hay, 39, had made plans to meet the boy at a hotel for sex and had booked a “whirlpool suite” in a Neenah, Wis., hotel, according to the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of Wisconsin.
Mr. Hay was arrested at a Milwaukee airport on Sunday on state charges of facilitating a child sex crime.
A search of his cellphone revealed nine sexually explicit photos of a former student at the Wisconsin high school where he served as a principal between 2011 and 2014, prosecutors said.
The photographs were taken when the student was in high school and under 18, according to a criminal complaint unsealed on Friday . The person in the photos told the undercover police officer that he did not send the photos to Mr. Hay when he was a minor, but that he might have done so as an adult.
The images were saved to Mr. Hay’s phone in 2015, before he joined the New York City Department of Education.
The child pornography possession charge carries a prison sentence of up to 10 years.
Mr. Hay’s lawyer, Jonathan C. Smith, suggested in a telephone interview that the broader context of the text messages cited in the criminal complaint was unclear from the document and he said that he expected his client would plead not guilty.
”I am anticipating that we will be vigorously defending the case,” Mr. Smith said. “There is certainly, I believe, more to the story and to the conversations.”
The New York City Education Department fired Mr. Hay on Monday after learning about his  initial arrest on state charges from Wisconsin police officials.
“These allegations are incredibly disturbing and absolutely unacceptable,” Miranda Barbot, a spokeswoman for the department, said on Friday.
The charges against Mr. Hay represent the most serious allegations against a high-level city education official in recent memory. The federal complaint compounds a growing crisis for leaders of the Education Department, who promoted Mr. Hay several times in the last few years.
The city’s Department of Investigation said this week that Mr. Hay’s background check was never finalized before he was hired.
The Department of Education said, however, that Mr. Hay had two background checks as part of the agency’s own vetting process, and that no issues came up. The Special Commissioner of Investigation for the department is now looking into Mr. Hay’s case.
Mr. Hay was eager to meet up with underage boys, according to the complaint. The police officer who was posing as 14-year-old “Colton” received a message from Mr. Hay on Grindr, a gay dating app, last summer that read: “Into daddies?”
The police officer responded, “maybe, r u into young guys. I’m 14 not 18.” Mr. Hay wrote back: “Yea I’m good with that.”
For the next six months, the complaint said, Mr. Hay and the officer traded messages about meeting in Wisconsin for sex. The officer frequently made note of his parents being in the room and suggested ways that they could meet without his parents finding out.
After booking a hotel room for their planned meeting this past weekend, Mr. Hay ultimately backed out, saying he had a family emergency. He said that he was “a bit scared” and noted their age difference, the complaint said. Mr. Hay left open the possibility of a meeting the next time he was in Wisconsin, the complaint said.
Mr. Hay, a Wisconsin native who had been living in Brooklyn, joined the New York City school system, the nation’s largest, in 2016. He worked for both schools chancellors appointed by Mayor Bill de Blasio and was involved in high-level decision-making about education policy.
Though he did not interact with students regularly as part of his job, he visited city schools frequently and served as a principal in Wisconsin.
Mr. Hay was a high school principal in the suburban Milwaukee district of Kettle Moraine for several years but left in 2011, citing differences with the superintendent. He then became principal of Tomah High School, in a more rural part of the state.
The sexually explicit photos found on Mr. Hay’s cellphone were of a former Tomah High student, prosecutors said.

Mr. Hay appeared Friday in Federal District Court in Green Bay, Wis., before Magistrate Judge John R. Sickel. He was released to home detention in his parents residence on conditions that included having no contact with minors, not using or having access to computers and surrendering his passport.