Vivian Gornick Can’t Stop Rereading
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Notes of a Chronic Re-Reader
By Vivian Gornick
Of all the things that haunt me about my drafty, tired old house, it is the books, sitting boxed up in the basement without sufficient shelving to hold them, that give me the most distress. It’s not that I need them, exactly. If asked to name the titles, I could list perhaps half. But within those I’ve read but not revisited while they’ve moldered in their cardboard prisons are untold insights. At least, this is my suspicion after reading Vivian Gornick’s new book, “Unfinished Business: Notes of a Chronic Re-Reader.” What misconception, or plain old error, calcified when I first encountered the books I’ve loved enough to tote from home to home? And what kind of revelations would emerge once I had time to reread them?
Time to reread! What a farce! And is there value, with dozens upon dozens of new books published every week, in returning to the piles that have already been consumed? Gornick’s new book is part memoiristic collage, part literary criticism, yet it is also an urgent argument that rereading offers the opportunity not just to correct and adjust one’s recollection of a book but to correct and adjust one’s perception of oneself. “The effort required to attain some semblance of an integrated self was going to be the task of a lifetime,” Gornick writes, and rereading, as she has it, is an essential part of that task. Bid your therapist goodbye, and dig out your college syllabus.
If there’s something both simplistic and almost academic-seeming in that prescription for greater enlightenment, Gornick’s lively, personable book is evidence of the pleasure that can result from the endeavor. “Unfinished Business” is sneakily poignant, revealing slivers of Gornick’s biography — a childhood in the Bronx, complicated relations with her mother (famously documented in Gornick’s memoir “Fierce Attachments”), early days covering the “women’s libbers” for The Village Voice, and her dawning realization that “the central dilemma of a woman’s existence” is “the inability to see oneself primarily as a working person.” But the book moves beyond these elegantly rendered but somewhat superficial dimensions of her life to traverse her greatest disappointments.
Among the most affecting rereadings that Gornick chronicles is of Elizabeth Bowen. She describes gulping down three of Bowen’s novels at a young age, thrilling to the mystery and melodrama of her stories but only just sensing that “something profound was being alluded to” in the Anglo-Irish novelist’s prose. (It was an unnerving experience, reading about Gornick’s earliest understanding of Bowen’s “The House in Paris,” to realize that my own impression of that book matched Gornick’s juvenile one. I read it as a teenager and took it to be a story about children.)
Years later, Gornick returns to Bowen and discovers the essence of that nebulous profundity she had originally sensed: “That fear of feeling makes us inflict on one another the little murders of the soul that anesthetize the spirit and shrivel the heart.” Threaded throughout her revised assessment of Bowen is the story of a man who inflicted such little murders on Gornick herself, deceiving and embarrassing her again and again. “Yet, repeatedly, I was seduced anew,” she writes, “the combined power of his life-giving conversation coupled with the pitiable vacancy at his center holding me fast.” Bowen’s characters deceive and betray themselves; only by returning to her novels can Gornick begin to understand how a similar fallacy ruled her life as well. It is one of the great ironies of consuming literature that as much as we read to expand our minds, we often take in only whatever it is that we are primed to absorb at a particular moment. Do not, Gornick says in this brief, incisive book, let that be the end of it.