In Davos, President Trump Frets About Boeing
DAVOS, Switzerland — Boeing is back on President Trump’s mind.
At a breakfast on Wednesday with the chief executives of major technology companies in Davos, Mr. Trump spoke at length about how technology is making things more complicated, according to four people familiar with the conversation who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe private discussions.
As an example, he invoked Boeing, which is reeling from the biggest crisis in its history after two accidents that killed 346 people led to the grounding of its 737 Max jetliner. Mr. Trump said that the 737 was a good airplane before, but that too much software had messed it up. New software developed for the Max played a role in both crashes, in late 2018 and early 2019.
His remarks echoed thoughts he shared on Twitter just days after the second Max crash, when he said, “Airplanes are becoming far too complex to fly.”
Mr. Trump, who was attending the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum, added that automobiles had also become too complex, complaining that it used to be easier to recline seats.
A day earlier, Boeing told airlines that it did not expect regulators to approve the Max to fly until June or July. It was the latest setback in a cascading crisis that has caused the Max to be grounded since March, led to the temporary shutdown of the 737 factory and resulted in the ouster of Boeing’s chief executive.
Later on Wednesday, Mr. Trump brought up Boeing again, calling it a “very disappointing company” in an interview on CNBC. He cited Boeing as one of the reasons the United States economy didn’t perform better in 2019.
“This is one of the great companies of the world, let’s say as of a year ago, and then all of a sudden things happen,” he said. “I am so disappointed in Boeing.”
The 737 Max crisis “had a tremendous impact,” Mr. Trump said. “You know, when you talk about growth, it’s so big that some people say it’s more than a half a point of G.D.P. So Boeing — big, big disappointment to me. Big disappointment.”
Mr. Trump has long been fixated on Boeing. Even before he was inaugurated in 2017, he was complaining about the cost of Air Force One planes, which Boeing makes. In the days after the second Max crash, he spoke with Boeing’s chief executive at the time, Dennis A. Muilenburg, who assured him the plane was safe.
Late last year, as Boeing prepared to announce that it was shutting down the 737 factory, Mr. Trump called Mr. Muilenburg again to inquire about the company’s health.
“Many of our stakeholders are rightly disappointed in us, and it’s our job to deliver on our commitments and rebuild their trust,” Boeing said in a statement on Wednesday. “We’re fully focused on the safe return to service of the 737 Max, and we’re taking action across the company to strengthen our safety culture, improve transparency and re-earn the trust of our customers, regulators, government leaders, suppliers and the public.”
At a news conference just before leaving Davos, Mr. Trump brought up Boeing for at least the third time in the day. Asked if he had a timetable for a trade deal with the European Union, Mr. Trump said he did not, and then began talking about the rivalry between Boeing and Europe’s Airbus, which helped lead to a round of tariffs against European goods last year.
Mr. Trump said Airbus “is doing better than ever because Boeing has not had a good time of it,” adding that Boeing had “better start recovering fast.”
“I hope they do,” Mr. Trump said. “They have some good people in there now. They have great people in the company, but they have some good people leading it now, so hopefully that’ll be taken care of.”
In a call with reporters on Wednesday, David Calhoun, Boeing’s new chief executive, addressed the mistakes the company had made in the development of the Max and in its handling of the fallout from the two crashes.
Mr. Calhoun, who stepped into Boeing’s top job last week, said that during the design of the Max the company had made a “fatal assumption” about how quickly pilots would respond to emergency situations.
The company determined that the plane was safe to fly in part because it presumed crews would take immediate action to handle a malfunction involving the plane’s new software, known as MCAS. In both accidents, pilots did not effectively counteract the software, which activated erroneously and pushed the planes into irrecoverable nose dives.
Mr. Calhoun acknowledged that Boeing had lost credibility with the flying public after a drumbeat of revelations about new flaws with the Max and repeated setbacks in the effort to return the plane to service. He also noted that the company’s unrealistic projections about when the plane would fly again caused trouble for airlines and frustrated Stephen Dickson, the head of the Federal Aviation Administration.
“We were our own worst enemy on this one,” Mr. Calhoun said. “It was hard for anybody to trust us.”
He brushed aside the thought of rebranding the Max, something Mr. Trump suggested on Twitter last year, calling the idea “silly.” He said the company would not start a “marketing campaign” for the Max when the grounding was lifted, noting that Boeing must win over “one pilot at a time.” The company has already begun working behind the scenes with airlines on strategies for persuading passengers to fly on the plane.
Mr. Calhoun also addressed the corporate culture at Boeing, the focus of renewed attention after the recent release of internal messages in which employees insulted airlines, mocked regulators and called their own colleagues “clowns.”
The emails and instant messages were “appalling,” Mr. Calhoun said, though he argued that the employees involved were part of a “micro-culture” that didn’t represent the company as a whole.
“This was a very unusual group of folks using very horrible language,” he said.
But Boeing’s work force has grown concerned about the company’s values. Mr. Calhoun said he had faced questions about the internal culture on a webcast with employees earlier in the day.
“They read everything, everything that’s out there, and it hurts,” Mr. Calhoun said. “Their confidence is shaken.”