You’re Not Being Drafted: Army Says Scary Texts Are ‘Completely Fake’
The text messages popped up on cellphones across the country, purporting to be an urgent communication from the United States Army.
“We tried contacting you through your email several times and have had no response,” one message read. The recipient, it said, had been “marked eligible” for the military draft and was ordered to report to the nearest Army branch “for immediate departure to Iran.”
From New Jersey to Utah to Florida, similar fraudulent messages have circulated around the country this week, setting off concern among young people and their parents amid an escalation in conflict between the United States and Iran. But after receiving multiple calls and emails about the messages, which in at least one case threatened jail time, the United States Army issued a “fraud alert” warning that the messages were fake and said it was investigating who was behind them.
“This is nothing that we are initiating,” said Lisa M. Ferguson, a spokeswoman for the United States Army Recruiting Command. “They are completely fake.”
It was unclear how many text messages had been sent or where they came from. Army representatives said they had noticed similar language in the messages, which have at times included real phone numbers and names of Army leaders. The Army would not be in charge of managing a draft, should one occur.
The draft has not been in effect since 1973, when it was abolished amid opposition to fighting in Vietnam. The military has since been an all-volunteer force, and changing that would require an act of Congress.
But as tensions between the United States and Iran intensified over the past week, young people have become preoccupied by anxieties about what the conflict might mean for them, discussing fears of impending war over cafeteria lunch tables and tearfully asking their parents whether they could be drafted.
The fraudulent text messages appeared to prey on those fears.
“I had a mom call me,” Ms. Ferguson said, recalling one case in which a group of teenagers had received the fake messages on their phones. “Her daughter is 14. That is not even an age that is eligible for a draft, and our recruiters aren’t even allowed to talk to anyone under the age of 17.”
Although there has not been a draft in more than 40 years, young men ages 18 to 25 are still required to register with the Selective Service System, an independent federal agency that collects basic information about Americans who would be eligible for service should conscription be needed.
Men can sign up online, or when applying for a driver’s license or federal student aid. Women are not required or allowed to register despite being eligible for combat roles in the military since 2015. (A commission is evaluating whether to change the rule for women.)
To reinstate a draft, Congress would have to pass a new law and the president would have to sign off, actions that would most likely require broad political support.