A Deadly Year on N.Y.C. Streets
[Want to get New York Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.]
It’s Friday.
Weather: Expect rain this morning, tapering in the afternoon, with a high of about 50. The rain will stick around this weekend, and it may mix with snow on Sunday.  
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Monday (Three Kings Day).
A 10-year-old boy in Brooklyn who loved riding his bicycle. A popular pediatrician who cared for children on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. A delivery worker from the Bronx.
All were New Yorkers who lost their lives while biking in the city in 2019.
At least 28 cyclists died in New York City last year. That’s the highest number in two decades, according to year-end statistics from Mayor de Blasio’s administration.
Overall traffic deaths — including cyclists, pedestrians, motorcyclists and those traveling in motor vehicles — were also up for the first time in years.
[More people are dying on New York City’s streets. What went wrong?]
Here’s what we know about the problem.
Biking has become increasingly popular in New York City in recent years, with nearly 500,000 bike trips each day.
But another popular gadget — the shared electric scooter — is not coming to the city as some had hoped. Governor Cuomo recently vetoed a bill to allow the scooters.
Want more news? Check out our full coverage.
The Mini Crossword: Here is today’s puzzle.
A New York City Department of Correction officer was charged with murder in the death of his uncle in Manhattan. [New York Post]
Toll increases take effect on Sunday at the six interstate crossings operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. [silive.com]
A state assemblyman wants to more than double New York’s beer tax. [ABC 7 Buffalo]
Friday
“Beethoven, Poetry and Music: Opus 132 Play-Along,” at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts in Manhattan, highlights themes of healing, gratitude and the inner self. 7 p.m. [Free]
The Bell House in Brooklyn hosts “50 First Jokes,” featuring a long list of comedians. 8 p.m. [$20]
Saturday
A luminary lantern workshop is at the Staten Island Museum. 1 p.m. [Free with museum admission]
Sunday
Maritza Shelley, a Holocaust survivor, appears at the Stories Survive Speaker Series at the Museum of Jewish Heritage in Manhattan. 1 p.m. [Free with R.S.V.P.]
Join Amy Kalmanofsky for a talk about “Women in Power and Powerful Women in the Bible” at the Museum at Eldridge Street in Manhattan. 3 p.m. [$15]
— Melissa Guerrero
Events are subject to change, so double-check before heading out. For more events, see the going-out guides from The Times’s culture pages.
The Times’s Melissa Guerrero writes:
Many New Yorkers have a favorite mom-and-pop diner. For the author and illustrator Jessica Olien, it’s Tom’s Restaurant, a beloved breakfast spot in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn.
Ms. Olien, who recently drew a comic about Tom’s for The Times, enjoys some weekend meals there. She can see the line for the restaurant from a window in her apartment, and if it is short, she and her husband head over.
They like the cherry-lime rickeys and French toast, “though the pancakes are what really makes Tom’s famous,” Ms. Olien wrote.
The Vlahavas family opened Tom’s in 1936 as an ice-cream parlor. It was known for its homemade chocolate, and as a go-to spot for the Brooklyn Dodgers — until they fled for Los Angeles in 1957.
When the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was killed in 1968 and riots ensued in Prospect Heights, neighbors and customers created a human chain to protect the restaurant from damage.
[From the archives: Read more about Tom’s Restaurant.]
Tom’s former owner, Constantine Vlahavas, was known as Gus. Before he died in 2014, Mr. Vlahavas was often seen giving free coffee and snacks to those waiting in line, even after his family members took over day-to-day management of the restaurant.
“There is a sense of decency that permeates the restaurant and demands respect in return,” Ms. Olien wrote. “Tom’s is one of those very rare places that feel welcoming to all who enter.”
It’s Friday — dig in.
Dear Diary:
It was the weekend and we needed to take two trains, rather than the usual one, to get to our destination.
We were pulling into a station after switching trains when I looked across the aisle and saw two pigeons under the seats.
A woman jumped up.
“Please help me get the birds off at the next stop,” she said.
As we approached the next station, the woman took charge, pulling out a yoga mat and using it to block off the area and encourage the pigeons to make their way toward the door.
One of the birds walked slowly over and flew out as the doors opened. The other one walked down the center of the train avoiding the doors in the middle of the car.
Suddenly, several passengers jumped up or used their hands to try to usher the bird out the nearest door. Just as the train was about to pull out of the station, the second bird flew out the door at the front of the car.
Everyone in the car started to cheer and clap.
“Hopefully they know where they are going,” the woman with the yoga mat said as the train continued on its way. “I am not sure if that was their stop.”
— Michael Schmidt
New York Today is published weekdays around 6 a.m. Sign up here to get it by email. You can also find it at nytoday.com.
We’re experimenting with the format of New York Today. What would you like to see more (or less) of? Post a comment or email us: nytoday@nytimes.com.