Minutes of the Monthly Chapter Meeting: Influencers’ Union L39
Meeting location: Logan’s Sick Unproblematic Babe Space (Very Safe)*
*Hereinafter referred to as Logan Paul’s basement
The chairperson called the meeting to order at 6 p.m. by banging a selfie stick against a rustic drum. In addition to numerous rank-and-file members, the YouTube Caucus, Flat Tummy Tea Association and Always on Expensive Vacation Council were in attendance.
At 6:02 p.m., a Beauty Blogger representative requested a short recess on the basis of, “There’s really good lighting down here and I want to get a quick pic.” The recess was denied on the basis of, “We haven’t even started yet.”
At 6:05 p.m., roll call of union officers was given. Last meeting’s notes were read and ratified. At 6:15 p.m., complimentary hair care vitamin gummies were distributed courtesy of the Committee for Maintaining Damaging Beauty Standards.
At 6:20 p.m., each union subcommittee gave a detailed labor report. Reportbacks indicated a steady growth of overall engagement across platforms, except for the case of the YouTube Caucus. A representative from the caucus suggested that this drop-off was most likely because of Mr. Paul, who had recently tweeted that in his opinion, “Climate change is kinda cool and dope, actually:P”
Mr. Paul asked that this be stricken from the meeting notes, citing, “You can’t talk about me like that in my own basement.” The chairperson overruled this request. (The Grievance Council stewards announced that they would follow up privately with Mr. Paul.)
At 6:22 p.m., a skills training titled“Influencers and Capital” was presented as part of a central initiative to standardize best-posting practices. The slide show included the following subsections:
The skills training ended with a group exercise on how to make it appear like you are about to eat a giant sloppy hamburger while still looking hot.
At 6:42 p.m., the union body voted on this month’s priority ranking for decorative kitchen sign slogans. Results of the vote were as follows: “Gather” took first place; “Life Is Better by the Lake” took second; and “Chop It Like It’s Hot” took third (thereby ending the eight-term prevalence of “*~DoN’t DreAm YoUr LifE … LivE YouR DreAms~*”)
At 6:52 p.m., roles were assigned for the coming picket action to be waged on the Department of Education, following its recent decision to bar the use of social media in public schools. The union body then rehearsed the chant to be used at the picket (“Kids Should Get to Scroll in School, Ads Can Be a Learning Tool!”).
At 7 p.m., a selfie recess was officially granted to the Beauty Blogger representative who had earlier inquired. This sparked a domino effect among rank-and-file members, and motions for a recess extension were granted 17 subsequent times.
Toward the end of the recess, the union member Miranda Sings raised a complaint about increasing bureaucratization of the union body, citing concerns that perhaps “the leadership was not sufficiently interested in advancing class struggle.” Many members were still taking selfies so the issue was tabled.
At 8:59 p.m., once most cellphone batteries and portable ring lights had died, the results of the union’s most recent collective bargaining agreement were announced. Notably, this year’s agreed-upon contract enjoyed a significant increase in #healthcare, #pension and #wages!
At 9 p.m., the meeting was adjourned with a chorus of “Solidarity Forever.”