When Joe Biden Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
Today on “The Choice” podcast from NYT Opinion, former Vice President Joe Biden visits the Times boardroom for his interview. The editorial board pushed him on reparations, his support of the Hyde Amendment and getting his public option through the Senate. Plus: Hagar the Horrible, Haight-Ashbury and a push-up competition.
In a follow-up bonus episode, found below, the board deliberates the interview with Mr. Biden. They question whether he understands the anger of the moment, and his selective invocations of the Obama administration. Then, board member Lauren Kelley gives an explainer of the Hyde Amendment, Joe Biden’s electoral baggage around it and why this is the most precarious moment for reproductive rights since 1973.
To read the unabridged transcript from the interview with former Vice President Biden, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the Democratic primary election candidates on the job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Jan. 30, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to its decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the United States.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and their endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | PocketCasts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey