The Man Who Mapped the West, and the Wife Who Made Him Famous
For a man who shows up in most biographies of Abraham Lincoln, histories of California, Civil War chronicles and accounts of pioneering the American West, John Frémont has remained a relatively minor player. There are a few biographies of him, but there hasn’t been anything like Steve Inskeep’s revelatory “Imperfect Union,” a fresh look that brings 21st-century vision to bear on the 19th-century story. In writing about both Frémont and his wife, Jessie, the aggressive promoter of his career, Inskeep does two important things. He shines an unsparing light on his subjects, and he finds unnerving similarities between the Frémonts’ America and our own.
Like Candice Millard’s “Destiny of the Republic,” an improbably thrilling book about the Garfield assassination, “Imperfect Union” finds a big, resonant, star-studded subject that has been hiding in plain sight. To Inskeep’s credit, it’s an open question whether the book’s true hero is Frémont or his wife — the privileged daughter of Senator Thomas Hart Benton (great-uncle to the painter who was his namesake), who decided her life’s work would be serving as a stealth political adviser, fighting for abolition though she was born a wealthy Southerner, trumpeting her mostly absent husband’s achievements and being famous.
Much of “Imperfect Union” describes the era of violent expansionism during which the United States annexed both Texas and California, then had to deal with the consequences. Among Frémont’s many accomplishments, some brave and many more bumbling, were the crucial mapping of trails from St. Louis to Utah and Oregon on a journey that had the press calling him “the Columbus of our central wildernesses.” The book describes his physical courage, compulsion to wander and frequent instances of getting lost. But he also had the vision to realize that San Francisco Bay, which belonged to Mexico at the time, could give a newly enlarged United States global trading reach. With that in mind, he bestowed the name Golden Gate on Northern California’s great port.
One of the main parallels Inskeep draws with the present involves the political and media landscapes. Frémont preceded Lincoln as the nation’s first Republican presidential candidate, at a time of rapidly improving information-sharing. Without technology, his enormous renown might not have been possible in his lifetime. But the new telegraph suddenly allowed news of his exploits to spread, and made possible both mythmaking and savage political smearing. This book makes clear that running for president was at least as ugly in 1856 as it is today. In fact, the single bravest thing Frémont ever did may have been to refuse to hide his Catholicism at a time when American nativism and anti-immigrant prejudice could have sunk him.
One problem Inskeep faces is the unappetizing nature of the people he writes about. Jessie was a flat-out bigot, and not shy about it. (“Fleas swarmed there,” she said about San Francisco, “as they do wherever the Spanish language is spoken.”) John lived during a time when “Native Americans” were defined as the whites trying to drive out immigrants, and he had been involved with Andrew Jackson’s Trail of Tears exile of the Cherokee. (Inskeep, co-host of NPR’s “Morning Edition,” is also the author of “Jacksonland.”) When it came to separating California from its Spanish and Indian residents, Frémont had no qualms.
And as the Civil War loomed, with Frémont transformed into a cautious politician, his record on slavery was mixed. Inskeep contends that the Frémonts embraced nativism when it was convenient. “They pursued a morally perilous course, crafting words and deeds to win over bigots while trying not to taint themselves,” he writes, about Frémont’s California senatorial campaign in the early 1850s. “They tried using sleight of hand to enlist prejudiced voters in an essentially progressive cause.” This is so iffy that stories in this very book contradict it.
But during his 1856 presidential campaign Frémont had the help and endorsement not only of Lincoln but also of Frederick Douglass, whose canny political instincts led him to find a waffler like Frémont more viable than an outspoken abolitionist who could never win. “Right antislavery action is that which deals the severest deadliest blow upon slavery that can be given at that particular time,” Douglass’s endorsement went. It didn’t help. In a three-way race, the Democrat James Buchanan sailed to victory over both Frémont and the Know-Nothing candidate, the former president Millard Fillmore. Not long afterward, the Supreme Court handed down the Dred Scott decision: a reminder of our nation at its worst.
Regardless of where your sympathies lie regarding the slippery Frémonts, there’s no denying the new importance Inskeep has given them. He digs as deeply as he can into Jessie, who wrote impassioned love letters to John but spent most of her life a continent away from him, and John, who couldn’t even get his name straight until adulthood. (He was the illegitimate son of Charles Fremon, a French teacher. The “t” and the accent were his own inventions, after some characteristic hemming and hawing.) It’s not Inskeep’s fault that Frémont was stuffy, indecisive, not very quotable and driven by self-interest. Case in point: He refused orders to leave California because he wanted to buy beachfront property there.
This book is filled with renowned people as different as Douglass, the brutal Kit Carson, the pioneering feminist Elizabeth Cady Stanton and the pioneer John Sutter (of Sutter’s Mill, ground zero of the California gold rush) as well as an unusually large array of American presidents. Inskeep, who picked up the Frémont story (no doubt in Jessie-fied form) as a kid reading about the Old West, has also resurrected some forgotten characters — like Jacob Dodson, a free “colored” American who first set out with Frémont on one of his early westward expeditions from St. Louis, became a loyal traveling companion and, long afterward, had the temerity to want to be paid for his work.
“Imperfect Union” is written in a streamlined, occasionally biting style that successfully pares down potentially sprawling material and sends constant warnings that history can repeat itself. There’s not a lot of showiness here, but the material suffices. If the book’s purpose is to illuminate and chill, mission accomplished.