And the Winners Are, Part 1: The ‘Super Mega’ Crossword Contest
SPECIAL COLUMN — The fourth annual “Super Mega” crossword contest, published in December’s “Puzzle Mania” section, received a record number of entries.
The challenge was to solve the 50 x 50-square puzzle by Sam Ezersky, then answer the question that was asked in two Across lines of the grid:
The reindeer were found in the following clues:
The only reindeer not named was PRANCER. That was the answer to the contest.
[See the answer grid for the Super Mega Crossword.]
By the deadline, we had received 10,426 entries, of which 10,257 were correct.
The winner, selected at random, is Jeung-Hoi Ha, of Jamesville, N.Y. The Times will send her a check for $1,000.
The following 25 runners-up will each receive a copy of “The New York Times Peace and Joy Crossword Puzzles” from St. Martin’s:
Below are a few interesting, sometimes touching comments that came with the answers.
Kristie Wolferman:
The New York Times Super Mega Puzzle has become our family’s Christmas tradition when we gather in Kansas City from Dec 26-31. Stuart Wolferman, our New York son, and Ethan, our Los Angeles son, are thrilled that they completed the puzzle this year.
Rosemary Pastore:
Our family has so enjoyed this puzzle — stayed on the kitchen island for all to add and change and discuss through all of Christmas. It is now stained and crumpled but was a great equalizer over the holidays! Thank you!
Karen Soule:
The oldest of our six granddaughters created a Google spreadsheet of the entire grid. While she and other family members worked it in Richmond, Va., her cousins in Minnesota and Seattle also participated. Collectively, we invested 86 hours to solve the puzzle. Thanks for bringing us all together.
Patricia Smeltze:
As an aside, I wanted to share that this puzzle was published on the last day of my grandmother’s life. She was an avid New York Times puzzler, even in pen! Our whole family, aunts and uncles, cousins and friends, grandchildren and great-grandchildren — at least 20 strong — gathered together in the Palliative Care Center at Morristown Medical Center doing this puzzle together in her honor. We really felt it was published just for us. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. — The Family of Betty Heitmann
Myrthe Doedens:
Thank you for providing enough entertainment to last me many a solar-powered-lamp night in Hurricane Dorian territory, Bahamas, while fixing up our family home.
Helen Phillips:
This is actually my first time ever completing a crossword puzzle, and I worked on it with many friends and family members: I began the puzzle with my roommates in D.C., made good headway with my parents and brother in Raleigh, N.C., got a few crucial answers from my grandparents in Va., and sought the help of old college friends in Charlottesville. This was a great bonding experience with my family especially, and it felt nice to work on something together.
Alex Sokol Blasser:
After two weeks of working on this “Super Mega” crossword, done by a family that has never ever completed one before, we have an answer! Prancer is the answer! Thanks for giving us a lot of fun over this holiday season. I guess we are into crossword puzzles now.
[Read about the winners of the Alphabetrivia contest in “And the Winners Are, Part 2”]