Love Letter: Prince Harry and Meghan’s Royal Exit
[Sign up here to receive Love Letter, a weekly newsletter about relationship highs, lows and woes, in your inbox every Friday.]
On Wednesday, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle announced plans to scale back their senior royal duties. Then came another bombshell: they plan to split their time between Britain and North America (Alexa, play “Royals” by Lorde).
This bold move is in keeping with the couple’s history of rule-breaking and the constant scrutiny they’ve endured since the beginning of their relationship. But the announcement, which was shared on Instagram, did leave many of us with questions (including the royal family which was said to be blindsided by the news). What does this all really mean? Here is what we know so far about #Megxit.
And, in this week’s Modern Love essay, Wayne Scott reflects on the complexity of his open marriage when he and his son make a trip to the hospital — where his wife’s boyfriend is recovering from a motorcycle accident.
Some couples avoid conflict, while others tackle their issues … in the shower? After nine years of marriage, Charli Penn and Gibran Watkins have discovered “it’s harder to fight when you’re naked," and lasting love requires creating a space to be vulnerable.
Email your relationship questions to our inbox and we will answer a reader’s love-related question each week, right here in the Love Letter newsletter. Spoiler alert: We are not licensed professionals, but we understand that love is complicated and we’re here to help provide support, thoughtful advice and resources. Please be sure to include your name, city (town) and state, along with your question.
We want to deliver content that truly matters to you and your feedback is helpful. Email your thoughts to loveletter@nytimes.com.
Also, here’s how to submit a Modern Love essay or how to be featured in an Unhitched column. Don’t feel like writing more than a tweet, an Instagram caption or a Facebook post? Consider submitting to Tiny Love Stories, which are no more than 100 words. Getting married? Here’s how to submit a wedding announcement.