When Amy Klobuchar Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
Today on “The Choice,” the endorsement podcast from NYT Opinion, Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota visits the Times boardroom for her interview. The editorial board pressed her on her failure to take off in the polls, her Trump-like plans to utilize presidential executive orders and the reports that she is a cruel boss. Plus: Lindsey the heartbreaker, pipe dreams and Uncle Dick’s deer stand.
Then, tune in to the bonus deliberation episode below to hear the board’s reaction to Klobuchar’s interview, her deft bipartisan skills and their impression of her as a creature of D.C. Then, a deeper conversation with a board member, Brent Staples, about the Midwestern affect in a bombastic political era and how it could play in the 2020 race. Brent discusses Klobuchar’s potential path to gaining popularity, her campaign’s melody and the sexism quotient in critiques of tough women bosses.
To read the unabridged transcript from the interview with Senator Klobuchar, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the primary election candidates on the job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different Democratic candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Jan. 30, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to their decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the U.S.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and their endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | PocketCasts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey