Greatest of All Time on ‘Jeopardy!’: Who Won Game 3?
Who won Game 4 of Greatest of All Time on “Jeopardy!”?
The third “Jeopardy!” match between the show’s three most celebrated players on Thursday had all the excitement of the previous nights but less of the drama, as the winner was clear before the host Alex Trebek revealed the final clue.
Ken Jennings shot ahead early in the match with a Daily Double asking him to name the 1832-33 crisis that ended when South Carolina backed down from its efforts to void federal law. (“What is nullification?”) Jennings maintained his significant lead when the Final Jeopardy clue again tested his knowledge of United States political history, asking him and his opponents to name the two now-defunct parties that each gave the country four presidents in the 19th century. (“What are the Democratic-Republican and Whig Parties?”)
Before the second game (each match comprises two games), Trebek warned viewers against the assumption that Jennings’s lead from the first game was too large to beat (he had 51,200 points to James Holzhauer’s 27,200 and Brad Rutter’s 17,600). But Jennings continued to lead the pack during the second game, especially after Holzhauer’s momentum was slowed by a missed Daily Double about a birthstone used for polishing that doubles as a color representing Florida State University. (“What is garnet?”) In a rare moment of frustration, Holzhauer grimaced when Jennings beat him to the buzzer on a clue about a “Star Wars” movie.
By Final Jeopardy, Jennings was too far ahead to beat, so Holzhauer used his answer board to honor Trebek, calling him the “GHOST,” or “greatest host of syndicated TV,” while Rutter used his space to cheer on Jennings and the Philadelphia Eagles. Jennings tried to answer the clue, but got it wrong: “These two foreign-born directors have each won two best director Oscars, but none of their films has won best picture.” (The correct response is at the bottom of the article.)
With Thursday night’s win, Jennings leads Holzhauer two matches to one, and closes in on a tournament victory. If he manages to triumph in the next match, which airs on Tuesday, he’ll claim the $1 million prize and the title of “greatest of all time.” If he does not win the next match, the tournament will continue until someone wins three.
All three players hold top slots in the “Jeopardy!” hall of fame, and this tournament is meant to determine which one can fairly be called the best. Holzhauer holds the record for the highest single-game winnings, Jennings has the longest winning streak and Rutter has amassed the most money won during his “Jeopardy!” run.
But Rutter has fallen behind early in games, often by missing Daily Doubles, leaving Jennings and Holzhauer to duke it out.
The tournament was given a rare prime time slot on ABC, and viewers are watching in large numbers. The opening match on Tuesday drew 14.4 million viewers and helped boost the show in the time slot that came afterward: the sitcom “Mixed-ish,” which received 4.8 million viewers, giving the show its highest ratings to date, according to Nielsen data.
The rules are the same as always, but these are not your average games of “Jeopardy!” The stakes are much higher and even the low-value clues are difficult. Because all three contestants are walking Wikipedias, they have to rely on quick buzzer reflexes to get ahead.
More than usual, Trebek has been using multimedia to introduce clues, like clips from the Netflix show “The Crown” and the film “Jerry Maguire,” as well as numerous prerecorded video clues read by celebrities.
Bryan Cranston read the category about chemists, a nod to his role in “Breaking Bad,” and Jimmy Kimmel introduced a geography clue about a Montana River near Bozeman on which he enjoys fly fishing. (That one stumped all three contestants. The correct response: “What is the Gallatin River?”)
Then there was the anchor David Muir, who gave a not-so-subtle plug for his nightly news show on ABC by introducing a category of clues based on his reports on subjects in world news, such as the hunt for ISIS fighters in Iraq.
The celebrity cameos and intense game play have been punctuated by a few lighthearted moments between the contestants. During Wednesday’s match, Jennings landed on a Daily Double clue asking him to name the German mathematician who developed calculus. When he said he was planning to bet all of his points, Trebek asked if he wanted to try Holzhauer’s trademark hand gesture of pushing a pile of invisible poker chips to the middle.
“Has James copyrighted this?” Jennings asked, to which Holzhauer responded, “One-time use only, you’re good.”
When Jennings got the clue right (“Who is Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz?”), he exclaimed, “It works!”
At another point in the show, during Jennings’s enthusiastic, accent-appropriate performance of a quotation from the film “Midnight Cowboy” (“What is ‘I’m walkin’ here!’?”), he pounded his hands on the desk in front of him, joking that he had broken his buzzer in the process.
“The fact that they’re able to fool around onstage and have fun with it while still playing at such a high level goes to show how comfortable they’re feeling,” said Andy Saunders, who runs a website called the Jeopardy! Fan that publishes statistics on the contestants.
Jennings and Holzhauer have also been playfully taunting each other on Twitter while the tournament is airing, without revealing who won (it was recorded in December). In one exchange, Holzhauer mocked Jennings’s botched attempt to draw a hammer and sickle next to a Final Jeopardy response about the Communist Manifesto.
In this tournament, Saunders said, success with Daily Doubles has led to victory in the match. Jennings had the most successful Daily Doubles in the first match and then went on to win; same with Holzhauer in the second match. Rutter scored on two Daily Doubles in the third match, and Jennings scored on one, but it was the biggest of the night, giving him 9,200 points on one question.
The contestants have risked all of their points on every Daily Double. To Saunders, that pattern shows that Jennings and Rutter have taken note of Holzhauer’s tendency toward high-value bets, saying, “It’s obvious that Ken and Brad have adapted their strategy to James’s aggression.”
(Correct response: “Who are Ang Lee and Alfonso Cuarón?”)