Moving Truck With Possessions of 3 Military Families Stolen on Christmas, Police Say
Three active-duty military families who were being relocated on Christmas Day had their holiday upended even further when the moving truck with their belongings was stolen, the authorities said.
The California Highway Patrol said the families were relocating from the East Coast when the truck, with a 53-foot trailer carrying their property valued at more than $100,000, was stolen in Stockton, Calif.
Investigators located the truck on Dec. 28 in Manteca, Calif., about 15 miles away, the Highway Patrol said.
Later that night, investigators executed a search warrant at the home of Michael Travis Forward and recovered about 90 percent of the families’ belongings. Mr. Forward was a member of the moving crew, Officer Ruben Jones of the Highway Patrol said.
Mr. Forward, 35, was arrested at his home in Livingston, Calif., about 55 miles south of Stockton, on Dec. 31 with a Harley-Davidson motorcycle that belonged to one of the families, Officer Jones said. Investigators are still trying to find 14 firearms that were stolen, he said.
“To steal on Christmas is really low and then, when you throw in that they’re military families on top of that, it’s despicable,” he said on Saturday. “That’s not how our military should be treated.”
Eily Cummings, a spokeswoman for United Van Lines, which was hauling the families’ property in one of its trucks, said Mr. Forward worked as an independent contractor and had passed a criminal-background check. She said the truck was stolen from a secure lot.
“The driver did everything he was supposed to do, so this is incredibly unfortunate,” Ms. Cummings said. “We take pride in the support of moving military families across the U.S., and our hearts go out to the three military families affected.”
Mr. Forward faced charges including vehicle theft, possession of a stolen vehicle and 14 counts of grand theft of a firearm, court records showed. He was booked into the San Joaquin County Jail and arraigned on Friday, Officer Jones said.
There was no answer on Saturday at phone numbers listed for Mr. Forward, and it was not immediately clear if he had a lawyer.
Officer Jones said that Mr. Forward, as a member of the moving crew, most likely knew that he was stealing from military families. He said he suspected the firearms might have been sold on the black market. “Those are pretty easy to offload,” he said.