What’s on TV Friday: An Ilana Glazer Stand-Up Special and ‘Little Women’
ILANA GLAZER: THE PLANET IS BURNING Stream on Amazon. The coming-of-age New York sitcom “Broad City” made stars of its creators, Ilana Glazer and Abbi Jacobson. About a year after wrapping up that show, Glazer is taking a solo turn with this stand-up special, which includes sharp observations on anti-Semitism, sexism and homophobia. She also discusses married life and, briefly, the Alfred Hitchcock classic “Rear Window” (“It was fine,” she decrees, before doing a bit on Grace Kelly’s voice).
THE KID (2019) Stream on Amazon and Hulu. Ethan Hawke plays the Old West Sheriff Pat Garrett on the hunt for Billy the Kid (Dane DeHaan) in this Western, which centers on a pair of young siblings who get caught in the middle of that hunt. The movie’s best quality by far, Jeannette Catsoulis said in her review for The New York Times, is Matthew J. Lloyd’s cinematography. “Though at times squintingly dark, his New Mexico scrub and skylines are distractingly pleasing,” Catsoulis wrote. “While marquee names wrestle with characters as insubstantial as holograms, Lloyd gives us a reason to keep watching.”
JUDY (2019) Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. This year’s Golden Globe Awards ceremony is on Sunday night, and The New York Times’s Carpetbagger columnist recently predicted that Renée Zellweger would win an acting award for her portrayal of the singer and actor Judy Garland in this biopic. “Judy” zooms in on its subject in the final year of her life, with Zellweger playing Garland struggling through a string of concerts at a London cabaret-restaurant in the late-1960s. She’s broke, with a pill habit, family problems and a troubled past. (Zellweger has a lot to work with, carefully.) The movie is “part maternal melodrama, part martyr story,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The Times. “Mostly,” she added, “‘Judy’ offers the familiar spectacle of one star playing another. Zellweger’s performance is credible, with agitated flutters and filigreed touches, though it leans hard on Judy’s tremulous fragility, as if she were a panicked hummingbird.”
LITTLE WOMEN (1994) 7 p.m. on Showtime Showcase. Those who have gone to see Greta Gerwig’s adaptation of Louisa May Alcott’s “Little Women” in theaters and want to experience another take on the material can turn to this 1994 version, which casts Winona Ryder, Claire Danes, Trini Alvarado and Kirsten Dunst as the four March sisters, and follows them as they come of age. The cast also includes Susan Sarandon and Christian Bale. “It’s actually one of the few movies of mine I don’t turn off when it comes on,” Ryder said in a recent interview with The Times. “I think every generation,” she said, “deserves their own ‘Little Women.’”
ANTIQUES ROADSHOW RECUT 8:30 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). This new, half-hour version of PBS’s popular antiques-appraisal show kicks off with an episode that focuses on vintage objects from United States politics, like signed photos of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, and a drum used during the 1848 presidential election.