Subpoena John Bolton
This article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.
Mitch McConnell has showed this week how little leverage Nancy Pelosi has over the Senate impeachment trial. He has the 51 votes to dictate the trial’s terms, he announced Tuesday. And he won’t negotiate with her over those terms, as he said yesterday.
But Pelosi does still have at least one card, and she should play it.
The House Democratic caucus she leads can issue a subpoena for John Bolton, President Trump’s former national security adviser, to testify before the House.
During the House impeachment hearings, Bolton — who appears to have damaging evidence about Trump — indicated that he would not testify voluntarily. This week, however, Bolton seemed to change his position and said that he would honor a Senate subpoena.
It’s possible, obviously, that he did so believing that McConnell would make sure the Senate never issued one. But Bolton’s new position makes it easier for the House to compel him to testify. “By stating that he would testify if the Senate subpoenas him, Bolton has effectively waived any argument against testifying should the House subpoena him,” the legal scholar Heidi Kitrosser told The Washington Post.
Benjamin Wittes of Lawfare called Bolton’s new position “a strategic opening for Pelosi.” As Wittes explained, “A subpoena from the Senate is not, after all, legally different from a subpoena from the House.”
Even though the House has already approved two impeachment articles, there is nothing preventing it from calling a new hearing and then issuing a subpoena to Bolton. If he does appear, House Democrats could choose to amend the articles — or leave them as they are. Either way, Democrats would know that the political case for impeaching and removing Trump had become even stronger than it already is.
Impeachment, as I’ve written before, is an inherently political process. Democrats have little ability to influence Senate Republicans, at least in the short term. But they can and should do everything in their power to influence public opinion, which may well influence the makeup of the Senate and the occupant of the White House in the longer term.
For more …