What’s on TV Wednesday: A Linda Ronstadt Doc and ‘Doctor Who’
LINDA RONSTADT: THE SOUND OF MY VOICE (2019) 9 p.m. on CNN. “If I were going to choose something to do, it would not be to stand up in front of a lot of people,” the singer Linda Ronstadt says in this documentary. “But I love to sing, I love to sing, I love music. So at some point, you do whatever you have to do to do music.” That’s not exactly a stereotypical rock-star outlook, but Ronstadt didn’t have the typical rock star’s career: After reaching arena-level success in rock in the 1970s, she moved across genres, releasing albums of pop standards and Mariachi songs. (“People would think that I was trying to reinvent myself,” she says in the documentary, “but I never invented myself to start with.”) Her varied career is the focus here; it’s discussed by both Ronstadt and by interviewees like Emmylou Harris, Bonnie Raitt, Cameron Crowe, Jackson Browne and Dolly Parton. “The political intelligence and matter-of-fact feminism that emerge in this portrait are among its most intriguing aspects,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The New York Times. He wrote that Ronstadt’s “cleareyed, down-to-earth thoughts on her profession, her family and American culture (musical and otherwise) make her someone you want to know better.”
DOCTOR WHO 8 p.m. on BBC America. Jodie Whittaker begins her second season as the Doctor in this first chapter of a two-part season opener, cheekily titled “Spyfall.” As ever, few details have been released, though it has been announced that Stephen Fry and the British comedian Lenny Henry will appear. Also in the season: fictionalized versions of Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla, played by the actors Robert Glenister and Goran Visnjic.
THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION (1994) 10 p.m. on TNT. The cinematographer Roger Deakins is back in the Oscar race this year with “1917,” a World War I movie directed by Sam Mendes that has inserted itself into awards-season conversations. In the 1990s, Deakins received his first Academy Award nomination for filming this classic Stephen King adaptation, about the camaraderie of two men (played by Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman) at a fictional state prison in Maine.
SPINNING OUT Stream on Netflix. Ice and melodrama coalesce in this soapy new Netflix series, which follows a professional figure skater (Kaya Scodelario) ready to call it quits after sustaining a serious injury in the rink. She returns to the ice after getting paired with a new partner (Evan Roderick); drama follows both on the ice and away from it.
MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL (1975) Stream on Netflix; rent on Amazon and iTunes. The British humorist and musician Neil Innes died on Sunday. See him pester Eric Idle as an inappropriately cheery balladeer in this Monty Python comedy, which turns 45 years old in a few months. Other highlights include the terrifying “killer bunny,” the “holy hand grenade” and a very dour set of chanting monks (Innes plays one of them, too).