12 New Books We Recommend This Week
On the one hand: civil war, world war, economic turmoil. On the other hand: love, literature, the will to survive. Our recommended books this week take on the big topics, from James Wood’s collection of literary criticism and personal essays to Ann Napolitano’s novel about a plane crash to Daniel Susskind’s look at the impact of artificial intelligence on the labor force. There’s also the history of a 19th-century power couple (written by NPR’s Steve Inskeep), a debut novel about women’s interior lives and a study of everyday citizens in authoritarian Russia.
Gregory Cowles
Senior Editor, Books
Twitter: @GregoryCowles
CLEANNESS, by Garth Greenwell. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) Like his first novel, “What Belongs to You,” Garth Greenwell’s second is also about an American teacher’s sexual and existential journey in Sofia, Bulgaria. It’s told in nine chapters that can be read individually, as if they were short stories. “In bed is where Greenwell’s men work out and reveal the essences of their personalities,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. The author has “an uncanny gift, one that comes along rarely. Every detail in every scene glows with meaning.”
IMPERFECT UNION: How Jessie and John Frémont Mapped The West, Invented Celebrity, and Helped Cause the Civil War, by Steve Inskeep. (Penguin Press, $32.) Steve Inskeep’s revelatory “Imperfect Union” brings 21st-century vision to bear on a 19th-century story. In telling the lives of the husband and wife John and Jessie Frémont, it covers an era of violent expansionism during which the United States annexed both Texas and California and then had to deal with the consequences. The book is written in a “streamlined, occasionally biting style,” and “sends constant warnings that history can repeat itself,” our reviewer Janet Maslin writes. “If the book’s purpose is to illuminate and chill, mission accomplished.”
SERIOUS NOTICING: Selected Essays 1997-2019, by James Wood. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $30.) This latest collection of work by James Wood, the commanding, occasionally contentious critic at The New Yorker, includes pieces about many literary greats: Chekhov, Virginia Woolf, D. H. Lawrence. It also includes some potent autobiographical writing. “At least three deaths haunt this book: the deaths of Wood’s in-laws and the death of his mother,” our critic Parul Sehgal writes. “There is stark personal accounting here; the ‘serious noticing’ of the title has as much to do with the self as with texts.”
THE NEW CLASS WAR: Saving Democracy From the Managerial Elite, by Michael Lind. (Portfolio/Penguin, $25.) Lind argues that beginning in the 1970s a neoliberal overclass seized control of the levers of power in American society, weakening or destroying the structures that served to protect the nation’s working-class people. “When the dust from the collapse cleared,” Lind writes, “the major institutions in which working-class people had found a voice on the basis of numbers — mass-membership parties, legislatures, trade unions and grass-roots religious and civic institutions — had been weakened or destroyed, leaving most of the nonelite population in Western countries with no voice in public affairs at all, except for shrieks of rage.”
ABIGAIL, by Magda Szabo. Translated by Len Rix. (New York Review Books Classics, paper, $16.95.) This magical novel by Szabo, the Hungarian author of “The Door,” is set during World War II at a repressive school for girls, with a rebel teenage narrator, imperiled Jewish students and a statue — the titular Abigail — with seemingly inexplicable powers. “The English edition of ‘Abigail’ is as welcome as it is overdue,” our reviewer, Becca Rothfeld, writes. “Rix’s translation is deft, but Szabo’s frank, conversational prose takes a back seat to her sinuous plotting: The novel unspools its secrets over many pages, and the resulting tour de force is taut with suspense.”
TOPICS OF CONVERSATION, by Miranda Popkey. (Knopf, $24.) The women in this debut novel talk frankly about topics including the rape fantasy, the ethics of procreation, Sylvia Plath’s poetry and female pain. “Popkey presents us with a shrewd record of the act of unflinchingly circling these amorphous notions of pain, desire and control, all the while quietly noting their clichéd contrivances in snarky, dark humor,” Antonia Hitchens writes in her review.
A WORLD WITHOUT WORK: Technology, Automation, and How We Should Respond, by Daniel Susskind. (Metropolitan/Holt, $28.) Predictions about machines taking over our jobs have been around for centuries. But Susskind, an economist at Oxford, makes a lucid case that it’s time to take them seriously, as advances in artificial intelligence may lead to devastating economic effects. Alana Semuels reviews it for us: “The book should be required reading for any potential presidential candidate thinking about the economy of the future,” she writes. Whatever the ultimate result of technology on human labor, Susskind “provides a useful exercise in planning for a more unequal future.”
THE BLACK CATHEDRAL, by Marcial Gala. Translated by Anna Kushner. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) In this tragicomic novel, a visionary preacher comes up against the grim realities of life in a Cuban backwater. Among its ensemble cast are accidental cannibals, angst-ridden ghosts and tenderhearted killers. “Even as the novel charts the voyages of its vagabonds, it represents an attempt to draw the periphery into the center,” Shaj Mathew writes in his review, “steering us toward the provinces as it renovates the Cuban novel.”
LORD OF ALL THE DEAD: A Nonfiction Novel, by Javier Cercas. Translated by Anne McLean. (Knopf, $26.95.) The noted Spanish journalist uses the story of his own family’s dead Falangist “hero” to probe wounds that still fester long after the end of the Spanish Civil War, in a book that flips the script of his earlier novel “Soldiers of Salamis.” Our reviewer, John Hooper, writes that “Cercas gives himself some postmodern leeway in this narrative, every so often speculating on how, if he were to throw off all pretense of not being a novelist, he would fill in the gaps in his story. But his reconstructions are tied pretty closely to known historical fact, and there’s no question but that he invested a staggering amount of time and effort in digging up what little there was to be known.”
DEAR EDWARD, by Ann Napolitano. (Dial, $27.) This haunting, powerful novel of grief and survival follows a 12-year-old boy who escapes from a plane crash that kills the rest of his family. Reviewing it, Angie Kim calls the book a “masterful study in suspense”: “Napolitano’s fearless examination of what took place models a way forward for all of us,” Kim writes. “She takes care not to sensationalize, presenting even the most harrowing scenes in graceful, understated prose, and gives us a powerful book about living a meaningful life during the most difficult of times.”
THE AGE OF ILLUSIONS: How America Squandered Its Cold War Victory, by Andrew J. Bacevich. (Metropolitan/Holt, $27.) A longstanding critic of the nation’s foreign policy argues that Washington mishandled the end of the Cold War by trying to dictate global peace and expand American influence. “Bacevich’s argument becomes an indictment not just of how America handled the post-Cold War period, but also of what America had already come to be by the time the Cold War ended,” Noah Millman writes in his review. “This indictment is ultimately a spiritual one: of obsessive consumption, and freedom defined as escape from restraint rather than self-mastery. Aware of America’s need for a great moral mission, Bacevich calls on us to turn that impulse toward fighting climate change, a profound and real threat rather than an illusion.”
BETWEEN TWO FIRES: Truth, Ambition, and Compromise in Putin’s Russia, by Joshua Yaffa. (Tim Duggan, $28.) A New Yorker correspondent in Moscow describes how prominent Russians have learned to navigate their country’s increasingly authoritarian regime. “Yaffa mines a rich vein, describing his subjects’ moral compromises and often ingenious ways of engaging a crooked bureaucracy,” Gregory Feifer writes, reviewing the book alongside two other studies of contemporary Russia. “Not only are corruption and violence employed to keep the populace in line; so too are the self-deceptions of the Russians themselves, who are manipulated through an ideological pastiche of nationalist, religious and cultural values.”