Alessandra Facchinetti’s Next Act
PARIS — Alessandra Facchinetti, the Italian designer who found fame when she inherited the Gucci women’s wear mantle from Tom Ford almost two decades ago, has since hopscotched her way through roles with some of the most prestigious names in the fashion business. She held the design helm at Valentino, Moncler and Tod’s — some stints longer than others — but more recently became part of a coterie of onetime fashion stars appearing to step away from the frenzied game of musical chairs at the top of the luxury industry.
Now, however, Ms. Facchinetti is back. And she has taken on yet another global creative director gig.
Earlier this week, just as the couture shows began for the spring season, Ms. Facchinetti, 47, sat in the gilded dining room of the Four Seasons Hotel George V in Paris. Sporting her signature look of a smoky eye and chandelier diamond earrings, clad in immaculate black from head to toe, she proudly unveiled the name of her new employer.
“Harlan + Holden,” she said, taking a sip of black coffee.
Hang on — Harlan and who?
The brand, which is almost completely unknown in the West, was founded in 2015 in the Philippines by Emmanuel Pineda, descendant of two of the country’s most influential retail families and owner of Adora, a swank department store in Manila.
With headquarters now in Seoul, South Korea, and with 20 retail boutiques across Indonesia, the Philippines and South Korea, Harlan + Holden has well-funded ambitions to become Asia’s next big contemporary fashion powerhouse.
Which meant hiring its first creative director, which is where Ms. Facchinetti came in. You can understand why the brand might be interested in her, given her starry résumé.
But why did she take the call? Wasn’t she finally tired of the whole fashion industry circus? Was there no other name that had caught her eye?
“I wanted a new challenge, the opportunity to design from a completely different perspective and felt I had something to say again,” Ms. Facchinetti said.
After leaving Tod’s in 2016 she spent time living in New York, then set up a consulting studio in Milan and took on a number of projects, including opera costume design. But it was only after the approach by Mr. Pineda, she said, that she felt willing to tiptoe back into fashion, albeit at a very different pace and with a very different philosophy.
“I have been part of an old guard where things have been the same way for a very long time,” Ms. Facchinetti said. “This project isn’t so much about my artistic dreams, but it is about generating value in design in a different kind of way. Our brand ethos is rooted in saving people time so they can do the things that matter.
“What’s more, I am experiencing what it is like to work in and across Asia, which is such an important consumer market to understand,” she added. “I am learning so much every day.”
The collection, split into three categories — day-to-day, travel and weekend, is meant to provide a seasonless but stylish uniform of basics. Called 9bc (the 9 stands for the ninth line produced by Harlan + Holden and bc for basic collection), it is set to go on sale in June.
With prices ranging from $70 to $300, pieces won’t ever be sold at a discount, Ms. Facchinetti said, and will be built on a core set of silhouettes that will evolve slowly and subtly, as opposed to continually introducing new trends.
According to the designer (who was modeling a wool mix tie-neck sweater sample from the coming collection), she will only use low-cost and easy-to-handle materials that can go in the washing machine and are resilient in humid climates; styles will not have buttons or zippers for easy wearing, and all shoes will be slip-ons.
The products will be made in Asian factories powered by solar energy and, as of this year, the supply chain will become fully transparent when it comes to workers’ conditions, Ms. Facchinetti said.
One thing there won’t be, however, is a catwalk show. (For sustainability reasons and with no trends, no need to show off the clothes, is the thinking.)
That said, it was Ms. Facchinetti’s creative vision on the runways — specifically her sharp suiting at Gucci and a bishop’s-style sleeve at Valentino — that first caught the eye of Mr. Pineda and made him an enduring fan.
“Alessandra was always in the back of my mind as we put the pieces in place with Harlan + Holden to where we could hire a big name with a big reputation as our creative director,” Mr. Pineda said on a FaceTime call from Seoul. “I always wanted someone like her — but then we did one better. We got her.
“She has engaged with every stage of the rebrand and has fit right in with all the teams, wherever they are in the world,” he added.
Although the design studio is in Seoul — increasingly a major hub for fashion, music and pop culture trends that ripple across Asia and beyond — Ms. Facchinetti plans to continue to be based in Milan and travel to Asia every six weeks.
She has weekly conference calls with the Tokyo office of Wieden + Kennedy (the advertising agency rebranding Harlan + Holden, with a campaign starting this week called “I Ain’t Got Time”) as well with Mr. Pineda. He plans this year to start a men’s wear line, expand a global e-commerce operation and roll out more retail stores and coffee shops in Asia (the brand also has a number of chic coffee shops and eateries in Manila and Jakarta).
A flagship store is set to open in Seoul next month, designed by the British architect David Chipperfield, whose studio also is behind the design of the new Pompidou Center in Shanghai.
“Daily life has changed rapidly in recent years across so many cultures,” Ms. Facchinetti said, “but the one thing we all want more of is time. It is a luxury — but it shouldn’t cost the earth. I feel like I’m designing with real purpose and being pushed in a way I haven’t in years.”