Nike Vaporfly Shoes Avoid Olympics Ban
In a highly anticipated decision in the running world, the world governing body for track and field announced Friday that Nike’s Vaporfly shoe, the chosen footwear of the world’s fastest marathoners but one that has drawn scrutiny for its performance-enhancing effects, will be permitted during the Tokyo Olympics.
Officials sidestepped making a ruling on whether the design of the shoes — extra-thick soles and springlike, carbon-fiber shanks that spring runners forward — gives an unfair advantage to runners who wear them. They chose instead to issue rule modifications that they said were designed “to provide greater clarity to athletes and shoe manufacturers around the world and to protect the integrity of the sport,” though only at the elite level.
The decision highlights issues that often confront governing bodies for various sports: how to balance technological innovation with the history and integrity of competition, and how to apply those rules to participants who pursue the same activities simply for fun. Just as golf has drivers that might be tolerated in a round among friends but not at the Masters, running now has two classifications of shoes.
In this case, the international federation, World Athletics, said that starting on April 30, elite runners cannot run in prototype shoes that had not been available for any competitor to buy on the open market for at least four months, and footwear must meet certain design specifications. The sole cannot be thicker than 40 millimeters and there cannot be more than one springlike shank in the sole.
In recent months, Nike-sponsored runners have been testing new versions of the company’s high-tech shoes, which include a steel shank — and maybe even more than one —  that propel a runner forward in the same way that the quarter-miler Oscar Pistorius, whose legs are amputated at the knee, ran on blades to propel him forward. With the shoes, Nike was essentially able to place a version of the blades inside the oversized soles.
Any race that receives a certification from World Athletics, such as the New York City Marathon and Boston Marathon and other major races, must follow World Athletics rules for elite participants.
Susan Hazzard, a spokesman for U.S.A. Track and Field, said the American runners participating in the Olympic Trials Marathon on February 29 will not have to abide by the new rules because they do not go into effect until April 30. Those runners must wear shoes that abide by the current rules.
Weekend warriors will have to consult their consciences to determine if wearing a shoe that is illegal for elite runners presents a moral hazard in those major races or in a local turkey trot.
“It is not our job to regulate the entire sports shoe market but it is our duty to preserve the integrity of elite competition by ensuring that the shoes worn by elite athletes in competition do not offer any unfair assistance or advantage,” said Sebastian Coe, the World Athletics president and Olympic champion.  
A spokesman for Nike did not immediately provide comment.
The midsole of the Vaporfly was thought to give 30 percent more energy return than most foams that have been used in running shoes since the 1970s.
The shoes came under intense scrutiny in October, after two marathon milestones fell in a matter of days by runners wearing the shoes. Eliud Kipchoge of Kenya broke the two-hour barrier in an unsanctioned race, and Brigid Kosgei of Kenya shattered the women’s world record by 81 seconds.
Kosgei appeared to be wearing the standard Vaporfly Next% model when she broke the women’s record.  That shoe will remain legal, so long as the sole of the shoe does not increase beyond the new maximum allowable thickness of 40 millimeters.
Kipchoge, however, was wearing a prototype shoe with an even thicker sole than the one on the Vaporfly Next%. It may also have had more than one spring in its sole. The new regulations limit shoe designs to a single shank. The shank can be broken up but must be in one, continuous plane. The Nike shoe Kipchoge wore has not been released to the public yet for purchase or for testing and Nike has not released its specifications. The Kipchoge shoe looks similar to the shoes that other Nike runners have been testing recently.
The shoes have also become popular among sub-elite runners, and their bright green and neon pink hues are a common sight on the feet of high-performing amateurs.
A New York Times analysis of amateur marathoners showed that the shoes had indeed fulfilled Nike’s promise of improving times by at least the 4 percent that the company had claimed.
In the last 13 months, runners wearing the Nike shoes have recorded the five fastest marathon times ever. Other running shoe companies have struggled to catch up with new designs, but they may face patent hurdles.
The previous World Athletics rules stated only that shoes must not confer an “unfair advantage” and must be “reasonably available” to all. The rules do not explain how these two values were to be assessed.
The federation had been under intense pressure to deliver a ruling on the Vaporfly shoes before the Tokyo Olympics this summer.
Regulating shoes, or any piece of equipment in sports that have many casual participants, can be a fraught exercise.
“Based on what creative people might do in conjunction with the materials scientists, if the regulations are not done right there is going to be an ongoing cat and mouse game similar to what we see in golf and especially auto racing where the regulations are a starting point for tweaks, workarounds, and gamesmanship of the highest order,” said Michael Joyner, a physiologist at the Mayo Clinic.
Amby Burfoot, a leading commentator on the sport and the 1968 Boston Marathon champion, said he doesn’t see any shoe that Nike has produced so far as illegal, but rather, “just illegal for elites in the Olympics, world championships and for world records.”
Before the decision was announced, some athletes — especially who are those not endorsed by Nike — expressed concern that the shoes had created an unlevel playing field, much as expensive high-tech swimming suits did before they were banned from competition.
“Wanting limits to shoe technology doesn’t make you ‘anti-innovation,’” the American marathoner Sara Hall wrote on Twitter. “Innovation is awesome — until it creates a quantum leap in the sport. Swimming did the right thing when this happened, to preserve their sport. Hoping track & field will eventually as well.”
On Friday, Hall expressed relief that regulation had come.
“Thank you @WorldAthletics for creating some clearly-defined rules when it comes to shoes,” Hall wrote. “The playing field may not be even for elites yet, but I’m grateful that just as every other sport has rules and limits when it comes to equipment, track & field will too.”
