PEN America Defends College Employee Who Was Fired for Joke About Bombings
The free-speech nonprofit PEN America called on Wednesday for the reinstatement of a worker who was fired this month from a Massachusetts college after posting what he said were sarcastic suggestions of American targets that Iran could bomb.
PEN called the dismissal of the worker, Asheen Phansey, “deeply disturbing” and urged his former employer, Babson College, to immediately restore him to his previous positions.
“Phansey’s post contained no hint of harassment, incitement to imminent violence, nor any other category of speech outside the safeguards of the First Amendment,” the organization said in a letter to Babson that was posted online on Wednesday.
“This was such an egregious case,” Summer Lopez, PEN’s senior director of free expression programs, said in an interview on Thursday. “It was such a plainly satirical Facebook post. We felt this was so beyond the pale.”
The letter was signed by over 150 academics (including several professors from Babson), organizations and writers like Sandra Cisneros, Salman Rushdie, Teju Cole, Molly Ringwald and Joyce Carol Oates. More signatures have been added since the letter was sent to Babson.
On Jan. 5, in a post that has since been deleted on his personal Facebook account, Mr. Phansey said the supreme leader of Iran should “tweet a list of 52 sites of beloved American cultural heritage that he would bomb.” His post, which suggested the Mall of America and one of the Kardashian homes as targets, was a response to a tweet in which President Trump said he had targeted 52 sites that were “high level & important to Iran & the Iranian culture.”
Four days later, after a screen shot of Mr. Phansey’s post had been widely circulated on social media, Babson College fired Mr. Phansey from his position as the campus’s director of sustainability.
“It is kind of chilling that something that was posted on my own time as a private citizen could be misconstrued to the point where they are calling for my job and making threats of physical violence to me,” Mr. Phansey said on Thursday.
The American Association of University Professors also sent a letter to Babson College, in which it referred to an “apparent absence of academic due process.”
“We have concerns about the stated basis for seeking Mr. Phansey’s dismissal,” the association said in the letter, dated Thursday. “A faculty member’s extramural utterance is expression in the faculty member’s capacity as a citizen, as distinct from the capacities of teacher or scholar.”
In spite of his experiences, Mr. Phansey said he believed the thin line between having an opinion about the government as a private citizen and holding on to a job could be walked.
“We have to figure out how we can be active, engaged citizens and be employed,” said Mr. Phansey, who has a master’s degree from Babson, a private business college in Wellesley, Mass., near Boston.
A representative for Babson College declined to comment, except to say that Mr. Phansey was not a professor at the institution, but a staff member.
Mr. Phansey said that he had been hired as sustainability director last year and that he had taught four classes from 2009 to 2012 as an adjunct lecturer. He said that he had been scheduled to teach another class during the spring semester.
“I really enjoyed directing the sustainability of the college and mentoring and advising students there, and I would love to do it again,” Mr. Phansey said. “It’s a place I care about.”