What Happens if Your Landlord Raises the Rent Without Notice?
Q: For five years, I have lived in a market-rate apartment. Last year, my landlord tried to raise my rent by 10 percent, but I talked him down to 6 percent. This year, I suspect he’ll want a big hike and will not be open to negotiation. However, according to the new rent law, I’m supposed to get a 90-day notice for any rent increase above 5 percent. My lease is up in two months, and I haven’t gotten a renewal. If the landlord does try to raise the rent significantly at this point, what are my options?
A: Last year, as part of sweeping changes to the state’s rent laws, the New York State legislature added new rules about the notice landlords must give tenants living in market-rate apartments. If the landlord plans to raise the rent by more than five percent — or not renew the lease at all — tenants must be given 30 days’ notice if they’ve lived in the apartment for less than a year, 60 days if they’ve lived there less than two years, and 90 days if they’ve lived there for two years or longer. Landlords do not need to give any notice if the increase is less than five percent.
At this point, you do not know your landlord’s intentions. But if your fears are realized and he ultimately sends you a renewal with a rent hike of more than 5 percent without a 90-day notice, you do not have to pay it — at least not immediately.
“Rent is a contractual obligation; it can’t be imposed,” said Samuel Himmelstein, a Manhattan lawyer who represents tenants. “If I’m your landlord, I can’t say, ‘your rent is 10 percent more, you have to agree to it.’”
Your landlord should know the new rules. Politely explain that you know them, too. He would either need to reduce any increase to less than 5 percent, or send you another renewal with the proper 90 days’ notice. (You’d pay your current rent month to month during the interim.) Once you get  proper notice, you could try to negotiate a lower rent with him, because you can always try to negotiate the terms of your lease.
As frustrated as you may be, stay diplomatic. The new rules give market-rate tenants some measure of protection, but your landlord could still decide not to renew your lease — with 90 days’ notice, in your case.