10 New Books We Recommend This Week
Crime stories hold our attention for a reason — the promise of plot, the chance of violence, the high moral stakes and stark challenges to social norms, or sometimes just the intellectual fun of trying to solve a good mystery. We bring you a host of such stories this week, both in fiction and in non. The true stuff first: Sanam Maher’s “A Woman Like Her” delves into the phenomenon of honor killings through the story of a Pakistani social media star who was strangled for pushing her culture’s boundaries, while Emma Copley Eisenberg’s “The Third Rainbow Girl” looks at the way a small Appalachian town continues to be haunted by a double murder that took place there decades ago. In fiction, meanwhile, there’s a missing child in India (“Djinn Patrol on the Purple Line”), a White House intern who uncovers a plot to assassinate the president (“Deep State”), a psychiatrist’s creepy new patient (“Mr. Nobody”) and the latest entry in Joe Ide’s IQ series of detective novels (“Hi Five”).
Outside the world of crime, the stakes are just as high — or even higher, in the case of “The Bomb,” Fred Kaplan’s engaging new history of nuclear strategy and warfare. Back to fiction, our other recommendations this week include a story collection about women at various stages of life (“Adults and Other Children”), a novel about a young Englishwoman questioning her place in the world (“Saltwater”) and a novel about an Indian woman who discovers a family she never knew she had (“Small Days and Nights”).
Gregory Cowles
Senior Editor, Books
Twitter: @GregoryCowles
A WOMAN LIKE HER: The Story Behind the Honor Killing of a Social Media Star, by Sanam Maher. (Melville House, $27.99.) Qandeel Baloch was called “Pakistan’s Kim Kardashian,” the country’s first social media star — a figure of intense fascination and outrage, adored and reviled for posting videos of herself half undressed, mocking mullahs and promising to perform a striptease for her viewers if Pakistan’s cricket team won a match. In 2016, the youngest of her six brothers strangled her while she slept, in a so-called honor killing. She was 26. Sanam Maher’s books about Baloch’s life and death is an “exemplary work of investigative journalism,” our critic Parul Sehgal writes. “Baloch cannot speak for herself, and Maher allows her to remain elusive, a figure who fashioned her public face out of truth, yearning and exaggeration, and who possessed a dogged insistence on living her life on her own terms.”
DJINN PATROL ON THE PURPLE LINE, by Deepa Anappara. (Random House, $27.) This first novel by an Indian journalist probes the secrets of a big-city shantytown as a 9-year-old boy tries to solve the mystery of a classmate’s disappearance. Anappara impressively inhabits the inner worlds of children lost to their families, and of others who escape by a thread. Our reviewer, Lorraine Adams, calls the protagonist “a boy vivid in his humanity, one whose voice somersaults on the page,” and praises the book’s prose and pacing: “Rich with easy joy, Anappara’s writing announces the arrival of a literary supernova,” Adams writes. “If you begin reading the book in the morning, don’t expect to get anything done for the rest of the day.”
SALTWATER, by Jessica Andrews. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) The narrator of Andrews’s first novel is a university graduate from the working class, holed up in an Irish cottage, trying to figure out her place in the wider world. Andrews’s writing, delivered in short fragments, is “transportingly voluptuous, conjuring tastes and smells and sounds like her literary godmother, Edna O’Brien,” Penelope Green writes in her review. “What makes her novel sing is its universal themes: how a young woman tries to make sense of her world, and how she grows up.”
THE BOMB: Presidents, Generals, and the Secret History of Nuclear War, by Fred Kaplan. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) Kaplan provides a rich, and surprisingly entertaining, history of how nuclear weapons and strategy have shaped the United States military and also the country’s foreign policy. “Nuclear strategy is an exercise in absurdity that pushes against every moral boundary but that has likely contributed to the relative safety and stability of the contemporary era, during which nuclear weapons have proliferated but major war has all but vanished,” our reviewer, Justin Vogt, writes. “Kaplan has a gift for elucidating abstract concepts, cutting through national security jargon and showing how leaders confront (or avoid) dilemmas.”
THE THIRD RAINBOW GIRL: The Long Life of a Double Murder in Appalachia, by Emma Copley Eisenberg. (Hachette, $27.) Decades after two young women were murdered there, a small town continues to grapple with the crime. This evocative and elegantly paced examination of the murders takes a prism-like view. The book “is not just a masterly examination of a brutal unsolved crime, which leads us through many surprising twists and turns and a final revelation about who the real killer might be,” Melissa Del Bosque writes in her review. “It’s also an unflinching interrogation of what it means to be female in a society marred by misogyny, where women hitchhiking alone are harshly judged, even blamed for their own murders.”
HI FIVE, by Joe Ide. (Mulholland, $27.) In South Central Los Angeles, a guy nicknamed IQ — who has a knack for solving the sorts of crimes that would be inconvenient to bring to the attention of the police — takes a case from a particularly loathsome arms dealer who wants to prove that his daughter is innocent of murder. This book, the fourth in a series, crackles with life. In a roundup of recent thrillers, Sarah Lyall calls it a “highly diverting book” with “real truths hidden in the entertainment,” and says that readers should “savor the freshness, vividness and ingenuity of the author’s prose.”
MR. NOBODY, by Catherine Steadman. (Ballantine, $27.) In this tricky psychological thriller, with a story that corkscrews and somersaults, the neuropsychiatrist Emma Lewis finds herself treating a dangerous patient who has lost his memory — or has he? He seems to know exactly who she is. “It’s a joy to encounter a suspenseful book whose turns lurk, rather than lumber, around the corner,” Sarah Lyall writers in her thrillers roundup. “Not everything rings true, but it all makes a kind of warped sense. Past mysteries haunt the present in ways that are both startling and claustrophobic. The patient’s real story, when Emma finally figures it out, is even weirder than you might imagine.”
DEEP STATE, by Chris Hauty. (Atria, $27.) An exceedingly capable White House intern, fresh out of the Army, stumbles on a plan to assassinate the president that involves the C.I.A. director, a senator and several titans of finance and industry. “The bodies pile up, as do the wry asides about what is and what is not good for the country,” Sarah Lyall writes, reviewing the book alongside other thrillers. The protagonist “is one of those preternaturally talented solo operatives skilled in every endeavor, from her physical stamina to her administrative competence to her Jason Bourne-like cool in the face of near-death experiences. She also figures in one of the more surprising double-reverse plot twists I have seen in some time.”
SMALL DAYS AND NIGHTS, by Tishani Doshi. (Norton, $25.95.) An Indian poet’s novel sends an unhappy expat home to South India to start a new life with a sister she never knew she had. The woman who studiously refused to have children with her husband now becomes a full-time caregiver. “As the title suggests, the story builds, one daily routine, one daily detail at a time. But Doshi treats this everydayness like the beach on which Grace lives: as a back-and-forth proposition, constantly in motion, always shifting slightly,” Aditi Sriram writes in her review. “Impressively, her focus never wavers. … Doshi keeps the pendulum swinging until the very last page.”
ADULTS AND OTHER CHILDREN: Stories, by Miriam Cohen. (Ig, paper, $16.95.) In 14 linked stories, Cohen tracks the same four women at different points in their lives, creating an acute portrayal of failed relationships and struggles to transcend social norms. “It’s more disconcerting than you might expect to re-encounter as an adult a character you’ve previously met in her childhood,” Maya Chung writes, reviewing the book with other debut story collections. “But unlike in a classic bildungsroman, here, much of the story line in between is missing; the result is curious, sometimes very dark — and often delightful.”