5 Comedy Shows to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
50 FIRST JOKES NYC at the Bell House (Jan. 3, 8 p.m.). For the 14th straight year, the comedian John F. O’Donnell and his friends will convene to celebrate our communal calendar flipping by performing their newest jokes. The concept is simple: At least 50 comedians debut premises and punch lines. Some comedians you’ll recognize from television. Some you won’t, but you may see them there in the year to come. Either way, the lineup will move swiftly and funnily.
718-643-6510, thebellhouseny.com
‘LADIES WHO RANCH’ at Union Hall (Jan. 4, 10 p.m.). If you enjoyed the new film adaptation of the 1860s literary classic “Little Women,” then perhaps you’ll be in the proper mood for what this sometimes-improper quintet of funny ladies has in store for 2020. Kelly Cooper, Caitlin Dullea, Maya Sharma, Caroline Yost and Sophie Zucker present a showcase that will include music, sketches and more. Mary Beth Barone will open the festivities with a stand-up set.
718-638-4400, unionhallny.com
LAUREN MAUL’S ‘TOO MUCH LOVE’ at Sid Gold’s Request Room (Jan. 6, 8 p.m.). In 2017, this comedian mocked the likes of Harvey Weinstein, Mario Batali and Louis C.K. by turning their #MeToo mea culpas into “Apologies From Men,” a collection of songs with accompanying music videos. Maul’s upcoming release, “Too Much Love,” is about “opening up your heart” as well as your relationship with your significant other. The video for its first single, “Phone,” pays tribute to the 1990s and the idea of waiting for a call from your crush on a landline. At this concert, Maul previews the album ahead of its February release.
212-229-1948, sidgolds.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
‘STANDUP 2020’ at the Peoples Improv Theater (Jan. 3, 7:30 p.m.). This monthly stand-up showcase doubles as a grass-roots voter outreach tutorial. You’ll learn about elections in your area, as well as how you can support the candidates who and the causes that matter to you, and even register to vote if you haven’t already done so. All that and, of course, comedy: Gary Gulman, fresh from his HBO special “The Great Depresh,” headlines.
212-563-7488, thepit-nyc.com
SARAH TOLLEMACHE at the Creek and the Cave (Jan. 6-11, 7 p.m.). This comedian, who has performed on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” and “The Late Late Show With James Corden,” and has racked up credits on NBC and Comedy Central, will record her first album in February at New York Comedy Club. Tollemache will use this Week at the Creek engagement in Long Island City, Queens, to prepare and decide which jokes will make the final cut.
917-806-6692, creeklic.com