A Plane Goes Down, Killing 191. Only a 12-Year-Old Survives.
DEAR EDWARD
By Ann Napolitano
Plane Crashes Mid-Flight. Hundreds Dead. One Boy Miraculously Survives. If the setup for Ann Napolitano’s third novel sounds like a front-page newspaper headline, that’s because it was. In 2010, a commercial airliner from South Africa to London crashed in Libya. A 9-year-old boy survived; all others on board, including his parents and brother, died. Napolitano became obsessed, not only by the story, but by social media’s fascination with it, so much so that she ended up spending the next eight years writing a fictionalized version set in the United States. The result is “Dear Edward,” a haunting novel that’s a masterful study in suspense, grief and survival.
The story begins at Newark Airport, as 12-year-old Edward Adler, his older brother and his parents board a Los Angeles-bound flight with a group of passengers that includes a singer-turned-housewife, an injured soldier and a tycoon with cancer and four ex-wives. After the plane’s takeoff, we jump forward several hours to a plane crash site in Colorado, where 191 lie dead. Edward is the sole survivor, the “Miracle Boy.” In alternating chapters, the rest of the novel follows two timelines — the hours leading up to the crash, and the years after, as Edward moves in with his childless aunt and uncle and rebuilds his life.
Napolitano’s dual-timeline structure turns “Dear Edward” into a suspenseful page-turner with sprinkles of mystery, satisfying our rubbernecking urge to see the unfolding of a disaster and its aftermath. We know from the beginning the plane is doomed, and Napolitano builds on that tension as more and more things go wrong — bad weather, a medical emergency — turning the sealed airplane cabin into the ultimate crucible for those inside.
If the “before” chapters provide the book’s propulsive momentum, the “after” strand provides its psychological insight and resonance. Not only has Edward suffered the trauma of the crash and physical injuries, he’s lost everyone he loves. He enters what his therapist calls a “fugue state” in which he “tries to stay away from thoughts and emotions, as if they’re furniture he can skirt past in a room.” The only one who breaks through is his 12-year-old neighbor, Shay. “No one can hurt you ever again,” she tells him. “You already lost everything, right?” With her help, Edward begins to meet and talk to the other passengers’ loved ones, and with each new connection, normalcy slowly returns — a clicking noise that’s been plaguing him ceases, he stops watching soap operas and goes outside, he starts eating again.
Children read fairy tales to master terror, and perhaps adults do the same with disaster books. More and more, histrionics seem to fill our days, with disasters of all types — political, natural, genocidal, technological — populating our social-media feeds. While none of the adults in either the real crash or the novel it inspired survive, Napolitano’s fearless examination of what took place models a way forward for all of us. She takes care not to sensationalize, presenting even the most harrowing scenes in graceful, understated prose, and gives us a powerful book about living a meaningful life during the most difficult of times.