‘Surviving R. Kelly’ Night One Recap: Threats and New Abuse Details
Last year, for R. Kelly and the women he is accused of abusing, everything changed — and the Lifetime documentary series “Surviving R. Kelly” was a big reason.
Now, a new five-part installment, “Surviving R. Kelly Part II: The Reckoning,” is examining what has happened since the series aired, including the singer’s metastasizing legal troubles and what became of the women who spoke out. The first two episodes aired Thursday night, and the next three will air Friday and Saturday nights.
For decades, there were lawsuits that accused Mr. Kelly of having sex with minors. There was his marriage to the singer Aaliyah when she was just 15. And there was a graphic sex tape — widely bootlegged, available on street corners across the country — which prosecutors said showed Mr. Kelly having sex with and urinating on a girl who was barely a teenager.
None of that brought him down, and Robert Kelly, 52, an R&B superstar and bankable hitmaker, went on performing and recording, singing and making money.
But within weeks of Lifetime’s debut broadcast of “Surviving R. Kelly” last January, he was dropped by his record label, then arrested the following month in Chicago. Today, he is in jail facing a long list of state and federal charges, including child pornography, sexual assault and obstruction of justice.
Mr. Kelly has denied all the charges against him.
Here’s a recap of what we saw on Thursday night, and the history of how R. Kelly got here.
“Surviving R. Kelly” was one of the most-viewed programs in the history of the Lifetime network. Part of what gave it power was its reliance on long, intimate interviews with women who accused Mr. Kelly of emotionally and physically abusing them, telling these women whom they could speak with and look at, when they could eat and even when they could use the bathroom. The sequel once again puts the audience face to face with his accusers.
“Part II: The Reckoning” begins with a series of women, all of whom have accused R. Kelly of abuse, seated alone in front of the camera. One of them is Tiffany Hawkins, the first woman to sue Mr. Kelly for having sex with her when she was a minor. She was 15 when the sexual contact began in 1991.
“I was the first girl, and nobody believed me,” Ms. Hawkins said. “And after that it continued to happen, again and again and again.”
Episode one details the threats and harassment rained down upon the women who spoke out in the original documentary. The parents of one young woman, Faith Rodgers, said they had to move out of fear for their safety. A Kelly associate threatened to release a compromising video of Ms. Rodgers with Mr. Kelly, and she had a seizure from the stress. Another woman, Jerhonda Pace, said strangers, presumably Mr. Kelly’s fans, threatened to beat her up in a parking lot when she was out with her children. She has since moved out of Illinois.
[A timeline of the accusations against R. Kelly.]
Mr. Kelly’s brothers discuss their childhood in Chicago, including how Mr. Kelly was sexually abused by a family member and a family acquaintance.
In episode two, Ms. Hawkins shares her story on camera for the first time. Mr. Kelly used to call her the “cable girl,” because she hooked him up: She connected him to other young girls whom he had sex with, all of them, she said, between the ages of 14 and 16. He was 25 at the time. Eventually, Mr. Kelly began having sex with her, too. She later sued him and settled for $250,000. As part of the settlement, she signed a nondisclosure agreement, the first in a series of confidentiality agreements with women that kept his conduct a secret, and allowed it to continue.
On Thursday night, audiences were also introduced to some of Mr. Kelly’s former employees, including Lindsey Perryman-Dunn. She said that she did not believe the waves of allegations against him, even though she had seen the videotape at the center of his 2008 child pornography trial and believed it showed him having sex with an underage girl.
One of Mr. Kelly’s brothers, Carey Kelly, said Mr. Kelly offered him a car, a record deal and $50,000 to say that it was Carey Kelly on the tape. He refused.
Viewers also saw emotional interviews with the parents of some of the women, including a pastor and his wife. Dream Hampton, one of the executive producers, suggested last month that this served, in essence, as a response to viewers who had wondered: where were their parents?

How did Mr. Kelly get here? A Chicago native, he released his first solo album, “12 Play,” in 1993, propelling him to fame with chart-topping singles including “Bump ’N’ Grind” and “Your Body’s Callin’.”
In 1994, when Mr. Kelly was 27, he married Aaliyah Haughton, who was just 15, below the minimum age for marriage in Illinois. The marriage was later annulled; Ms. Haughton, who performed as Aaliyah, became a popular singer and died in a plane crash in 2001.
In 1996, Mr. Kelly, then 29, married again, this time to a dancer, Andrea Lee, who was 22. Together, they had three children. They divorced in 2009, and her accusations of emotional and physical abuse at his hands were chronicled in “Surviving R. Kelly.”
But how was Mr. Kelly able to marry Aaliyah when she was just 15? Not long after it happened, Vibe magazine found the marriage certificate, which falsely listed her as 18. Last month, federal prosecutors accused him of having bribed a government official in Illinois so that he could get Aaliyah a fake ID. With that, the prosecutors say, Mr. Kelly and Aaliyah were able to obtain the marriage license.
In the years after he married Ms. Lee, Mr. Kelly settled lawsuits from at least three women accusing him of having sex with them while they were underage. He also won three Grammys for his hit single “I Believe I Can Fly.”
In 2002, a video that appeared to show Mr. Kelly having sex with a teenage girl and urinating in her mouth was sent to Jim DeRogatis, a music journalist at The Chicago Sun-Times, which reported that the footage was being investigated by the Chicago police.
That June, after a police investigation into the video footage, Mr. Kelly was indicted by a grand jury in Chicago on 21 child pornography counts. But the case took six years to come to trial. His lawyers argued it was not certain that Mr. Kelly was the man in the video or that the young girl was who prosecutors said she was.

Although she was identified by friends and extended family, neither she nor her parents testified. Mr. Kelly was found not guilty in 2008 on all counts.
He continued to release music and performed at the World Cup in 2010, at Pitchfork Music Festival in 2013, at Lollapalooza in 2014 and at the Soul Train Awards in 2015.
Last year, Mr. Kelly was accused by a federal grand jury of having bribed the person at the center of his 2008 trial, and her family, multiple times for more than a dozen years. In exchange for money and gifts, including a GMC Yukon Denali SUV, they were told to lie to investigators to protect him, according to the indictment.
In July 2017, a BuzzFeed article by Mr. DeRogatis, “Inside the Pied Piper of R&B’s ‘Cult,’” reported on allegations that the singer was living with several young women and controlling them by taking away their phones, limiting contact with their families and having them abide by restrictive rules that governed, among other things, what they ate, when they bathed and when they slept.
It was one of a series of reports that put Mr. Kelly in the spotlight again. But this time the #MeToo movement, started by the activist Tarana Burke about a decade earlier, was about to explode. A campaign of protests, in person and on social media under the hashtag #MuteRKelly, began to pick up steam.
Concerts were canceled and people close to the singer, including an assistant, a lawyer and a publicist, parted ways with him. Spotify removed his music from its official playlists.
After “Surviving R. Kelly” aired, Kimberly Foxx, Chicago’s top prosecutor, publicly called for women to come forward, and by the following month, Mr. Kelly had been arrested and charged with 10 counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. Numerous local and federal charges have since been added in Illinois, New York and Minnesota.
Among them are charges that he produced child pornography, conspired to obstruct justice and violated the Mann Act, which prohibits moving people across state lines for the purpose of engaging in illegal sexual activity.
Mr. Kelly has been in federal custody in Chicago since July. He is scheduled to stand trial on federal charges in April.