Teenage Heroes in a Mythical Land Fight Monsters, and Stereotypes
At one point in Joseph Elliott’s THE GOOD HAWK (Walker Books, 368 pp., $17.99; ages 10 to 14), Jaime, one of the novel’s protagonists, admits, “I don’t feel particularly brave.” A supporting character replies, “None of the bravest people do.” The wisdom of these lines echoes throughout the novel, reminding readers that it’s human to feel vulnerable in the face of unimaginable odds.
“The Good Hawk” tells the story of two flawed, unlikely teenage heroes in a mythical Scotland, on the Isle of Skye. Agatha, 15, is a Hawk, charged with patrolling the sea wall. Some say her duties are a pretense for keeping the community’s retarch out of the way. That’s a cruel term used to describe her congenital condition, an unnamed disability that is inspired by Elliott’s work with children with Down syndrome. But what truly sets Agatha apart from her clan is her secret ability to talk to animals.
Fourteen-year-old Jaime is an Angler, or fisherman, and his fear of the open ocean makes him inept at his job. He’s forced to marry a young girl named Lileas in order to solidify an alliance, and tradition calls for the bride and groom to spend their wedding night in a rowboat at sea. But Agatha has stowed away in the vessel in an attempt to stop the wedding. It’s too late to return her to land, so the three of them hunker down in the boat for the night.
They are awakened by the sound of four chimes, as Viking-ish invaders have attacked Skye in the predawn hours. Soon, they carry the survivors away to be enslaved. But our trio has avoided capture on the rickety boat.
As they embark on a quest to save their clanspeople, Jaime is forced into a leadership role. He’s unsure of himself because he lacks experience and combat skills. The journey across icy waters and cursed terrain is more treacherous than they imagined, and they’re left questioning decisions they made along the way. They encounter monsters: shadow creatures, called the sgàilean, and gangly, wolflike animals known as terror beasts. Even when Agatha reveals she can communicate with animals and uses her gift to aid them, a new set of challenges emerges.
Elliott’s many references to Scottish Gaelic and occasional Old Norse-inspired English fasten readers into the medieval timeline. This novel is fun to read, yet it reminded me that the world can be dangerous, dark and bloody. The allies and adversaries our virtuous heroes meet along the way only underline how out of their depth they are.
As alternating narrators, Jaime and Agatha complement each other wonderfully. Jaime is self-conscious, anxious and unsure of his place in the world. The harsh realities of their situation and the likelihood of an unspeakable outcome is a constant punch in the gut to him, and it doesn’t help that he’s surrounded by people who are braver and stronger. His insecurity is overwhelming, intimate and familiar. It’s heart-rending to watch him lose faith in himself as he travels closer to their destination.
As for Agatha, she is courageous, stubborn and contemptuous when she doesn’t get her way. Elliott has created a singular voice for her, using simpler, sometimes odd but no less expressive language. No doubt thanks to his experience with children with special needs, Agatha never comes across as stereotypically helpless or “inspirational.” With her infectious determination, it’s endearing to read from her vantage point and cheer her as she blows away the naysayers.
Elliott’s twist on the hero’s-journey narrative reminded me that the best way to survive hardship is often by leaning on others and having faith in yourself — no matter your presumed intellectual or physical shortcomings. With its blend of unusual character development and clever exploration of ancient realms, “The Good Hawk” is a story fantasy-loving young readers may not even know they’ve been waiting for.