‘Fear-Free’ Pets Make for Happier Pets, and Owners
Joanna Miller’s 14-year-old miniature Doberman, Tito, would snap or try to bite anyone at the vet’s office who tried to check his eyes, ears or teeth, “pretty much everything they needed to do,” she said. Muzzling him only made his fear and anxiety worse.
So Mrs. Miller turned to a dog trainer, who recommended taking him to a “fear-free” veterinary clinic near her Chicago home.
Tito now faces his fears with relative calm, helped along by a mild sedative two hours before an appointment, along with cream cheese or peanut butter snacks once he arrives. At the clinic, he is also quickly ushered into the quiet of his own exam room, away from the unfamiliar scents and sounds of other nervous dogs.
The idea of “fear free” veterinary care, intended to address not just the physical health but also the emotional well-being of animals, goes back 30 or 40 years, veterinarians say. But in 2016, an Idaho-based vet, Dr. Marty Becker, branded the approach, starting a company called Fear Free that certifies veterinarians, veterinary technicians, other staff members and even whole practices after up to 40 hours of online training. The cost for certification begins at under $300 depending on the number of memberships a veterinary practice purchases, with a $99 annual renewal fee.
So far, more than 39,000 professionals, and 113 veterinary practices, in the United States and Canada have gotten “fear free” certification. Though many veterinarians and animal hospitals already deliver compassionate and sensitive care, without certification.
Dr. Becker, a syndicated columnist and author who used to appear on ABC’s “Good Morning America,” says that fear and anxiety in cats and dogs can mask other health problems. It’s also at the root of most aggressive behaviors that can rupture the human-animal bond and lead to abandonment, relinquishment or euthanasia.
Fear-based anxieties may be triggered by isolated events, such as fireworks or thunderstorms, or by chronic underlying fears tied to early abuse, poor socialization or even genetics.
“Almost all the behavior problems we see in pets are due to fear and anxiety and pain,” says Dr. Gary Landsberg, a Canadian veterinarian and veterinary behavior specialist. “When a pet can’t avoid a fearful situation, aggression may result.”
Chronic anxiety can have lasting consequences for pets, as it does for people. Among the effects, Dr. Landsberg says, are weakened immunity, gastrointestinal and respiratory problems and slower wound healing. There’s also some evidence that fearful pets age faster than their calmer peers.
Managing pet anxiety can in some cases be straightforward, veterinarians say, once medical reasons have been ruled out. Anti-anxiety medications and desensitizing techniques can help.
“Some of what we do is common sense, and some of it is common sense in hindsight,” says Dr. Bryan Slinker, a veterinarian at Washington State University. An upcoming study, he says, will look at how pets handle needles and vaccines, with one group receiving standard care and the other distracted with tasty treats during inoculation.
“Right now, we know a lot of people don’t even go to the vet because their pets get too stressed,” says Dr. Slinker, who owns five cats and notes that cats are more easily stressed than dogs. A Bayer study found that 40 percent of cat owners cited “feline resistance” as a reason for not taking their cats to the vet frequently, if at all, compared to the 15 percent of dog owners citing “canine resistance.”
“Cats are not team players,” says Eileen Simoneau, a former kindergarten teacher in Florida who owns two Siamese cats and a Maine coon mix. Although one of her cats is “easy breezy,” she says, the other two frequently mix it up.
She has now adopted some simple strategies she learned from her local vet in Kissimmee, Dr. Lynn Honeckman, who is Fear Free certified. They include putting a bell on one cat’s collar so he can’t sneak up on the other, and providing four litter boxes rather than three, to lessen the chance of overcrowding. “The idea is to pre-empt where things can get ugly” to prevent anxiety-producing behaviors, she says.
Dr. Gary Weitzman, president of the San Diego Humane Society and SPCA, says he sees little need for his facility to seek Fear Free certification. The shelter regularly takes steps to minimize fear and anxiety in the 40,000 cats and dogs that pass through its doors each year, he says, using many of the same strategies Fear Free suggests: soft music, low lighting, noise reduction and mild sedatives, including Prozac.
Easing anxiety in pets may be lifesaving. While cats tend to suffer more than dogs from fear and anxiety, Dr. Weitzman says, the behavioral problems that arise in dogs tend to be more lethal, since aggression may make it impossible to place these animals in homes. “It’s a fact, and it’s sad,” he said.
Dr. Natalie Marks, medical director of Blum Animal Hospital in Chicago, where Tito now goes for his care, say that almost  everyone on her 70-member staff has earned Fear Free certification. She likes how the program teaches staff members to anticipate fearful behaviors, incorporates well-defined tactics into standard veterinary practice and provides up-to-date research.
Fear-ridden dogs and cats at the hospital may get towels soaked in pheromones that may have a calming effect, toys to distract them, or a range of menu options from low-fat hot dogs to tuna and bonito flakes, she says. Thunder shirts that swaddle excessively nervous animals, calming them, also are available.
“We try to be creative with our low-stress handling to make pets not only comfortable, but not see us as anxiety-producing triggers when they come back for a second visit,” Dr. Marks says. “Our clients seem much happier, and our workman comp claims are much smaller as well.”