Trump Impeachment Trial: A Glossary
Many big political news events give rise to colorful terms that stick in the public memory. The Teapot Dome. The Saturday night massacre. The stained blue dress. Hanging chads.
And if you found yourself wondering in recent days who the “three amigos” are, what the “deliverable” was, or what Hamilton has to do with impeachment, you were not alone.
We’re here to help. Here is a quick glossary of memorable or confusing terms and phrases that we’ve heard so far during the Senate trial of President Trump.
Quid pro quo Latin for “something for something.” The question of whether there was a quid pro quo involved in Mr. Trump’s demand that Ukraine open investigations that he thought could benefit him politically is at the heart of the trial. (Here are 15 times Mr. Trump and his allies have claimed there was “no quid pro quo.” )
The deliverable A public announcement by Ukrainian officials that they would investigate Hunter Biden, Joe Biden’s son, which Mr. Trump is said to have wanted in exchange for aid. The term was used in text messages between American and Ukrainian officials that were released by the Democrats leading the impeachment inquiry.
Impeachment managers Essentially, the prosecutors. The seven managers are House Democrats chosen by Speaker Nancy Pelosi to make the case that Mr. Trump abused the power of his office and obstructed Congress. They are led by Adam B. Schiff, chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. (The president’s lawyers are simply called the defense team.)
“Head on a pike” During Mr. Schiff’s closing remarks, he mentioned a CBS report that quoted an anonymous source who warned Republican senators “vote against the president and your head will be on a pike.” Senator Susan Collins of Maine and other Republicans criticized this part of Mr. Schiff’s speech.
“Burden sharing” This term was at the center of the president’s defense. His lawyer, Mr. Cipollone, argued that the Trump administration’s hold on military assistance to Ukraine was driven by the president’s belief that European allies were not doing their share in supporting the former Soviet republic in its struggle with Russia on its eastern border.
Hamilton and “Hamilton” The founding father Alexander Hamilton and a Broadway musical based on his life have been invoked or alluded to many times. Along with John Jay and James Madison in 1787 and 1788, Hamilton wrote the Federalist Papers, a series of essays expounding on the Constitution’s provisions and urging its adoption. Since the Constitution does not lay out rules for impeachment in detail, the papers are a vital reference. In Federalist 65, Hamilton described impeachable conduct as:
“Schiff quoted Hamilton so many times today he was nominated for five Tony Awards,” Jimmy Kimmel quipped early in the trial. In interviews, Senator Amy Klobuchar, one of the jurors and a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, has been name-dropping a song from the show, “The Room Where It Happens,” in arguing that more witnesses be called. And that was all before the trial was  roiled by revelations in an unpublished memoir, “The Room Where It Happened,” by John Bolton, the former national security adviser.
“Golden rule of impeachment” During closing remarks, Mr. Cipollone said, “For the Democrats, the golden rule could be, ‘Do unto Republicans as you would have them do unto Democrats,’ and hopefully we will never be in another position in this country where we have another impeachment, but vice versa for that rule.”
“Respect” The concept of respect was invoked repeatedly during a testy exchange between Mr. Cipollone and Mr. Schiff. It started when Mr. Cipollone said, “With the greatest respect, if the Senate can just decide there’s no executive privilege, guess what? You’re destroying executive privilege.”
Mr. Schiff of California snapped back: “It may be different in the court than it is in this chamber and in the House, but when anybody begins a sentence with the phrase, ‘I have the greatest respect for,’ you have to look out for what follows.” Mr. Cipollone said he wouldn’t respond to “ad hominem attacks" but insisted, “…when I say ‘the greatest respect,’ I mean it.”
Executive privilege The executive branch’s right to withhold information in the public interest. If current or former White House officials do not want to comply with subpoenas, the privilege can provide them with legal protection.
Pettifogging A term used by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. while admonishing the House managers and Mr. Trump’s lawyers to respect the setting. He described an exchange during the 1905 impeachment trial of a federal judge, when a senator objected to the use of the word, which Webster’s New World College Dictionary defines as “a lawyer who handles petty cases, especially one who uses unethical methods in conducting trumped-up cases.”
The whistle-blower The anonymous C.I.A. officer who touched off the impeachment inquiry with his explosive complaint about Mr. Trump’s effort to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rivals. He said he had heard from other officials that Mr. Trump, in a July 25 call, urged the Ukrainian president to investigate the Bidens.
Burisma The Ukrainian energy company on whose board Hunter Biden served while his father was vice president.
“Perfect phone call”  How Mr. Trump has characterized that July 25 call with President Zelensky, in which he memorably said, “I would like you to do us a favor.”
High crimes and misdemeanors A broad phrase for misconduct by a public official. Presidents and other officials who have committed “treason, bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors” can be removed from office by a majority vote in Congress, according to the United States Constitution.
Three amigos Gordon D. Sondland, the American ambassador to the European Union; Rick Perry, the former energy secretary; and Kurt D. Volker, the former special envoy to Ukraine. Mr. Sondland once referred to himself, Mr. Perry and Mr. Volker as the “three amigos” in an interview with Ukrainian television. These three officials influenced the Trump administration’s Ukraine policy, according to David Holmes, an official from the United States Embassy in Kyiv. Mr. Schiff used the term as he made his arguments.
“Drug deal” How Mr. Bolton is said to have referred to the Ukraine imbroglio. Fiona Hill, Mr. Trump’s former adviser on Russia and Europe, testified that Mr. Bolton instructed her to tell White House lawyers that he was “not part of whatever drug deal Sondland and Mulvaney are cooking up,” according to two people who were present during her deposition. (Mick Mulvaney is now the acting White House chief of staff.)
Milk Besides water, milk is the only other beverage allowed on the Senate floor. In 1966, Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois asked if it was a violation of Senate rules for a page to bring him a glass of milk. The presiding officer said no, and “Milk While Speaking” was added to the Senate rules. During the trial on Wednesday, Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas was spotted drinking two glasses of milk. Thanks to Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, the lawmakers also have a “candy desk” filled with sweets made in Mr. Toomey’s home state. (Electronics and talking are also prohibited.)
Derek Jeter Representative Hakeem Jeffries joked about a fellow New Yorker asking him if he had “heard the latest outrage” — someone didn’t vote for Jeter on their Baseball Hall of Fame ballot, preventing the former Yankees star from becoming the second unanimously elected player:
SCIF (Pronounced skiff.) Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility. The secure basement room in the Capitol where the Democrats conducted interviews and depositions related to the impeachment inquiry. Pat A. Cipollone, one of Mr. Trump’s lawyers, claimed that the Democrats denied Republicans access to the facility. But Republicans on the Oversight, Intelligence and Foreign Affairs committees did participate in interviews and depositions in the SCIF, according to PolitiFact.
Sham investigations What Democrats say Mr. Trump wanted Ukraine to conduct into the Bidens.
Sham impeachment A social media hashtag that conservative lawmakers and others are using to describe the proceedings.
