Woodland Park, N.J.: Open Space and Modestly Priced Housing
Searching online for “55-and-over communities” started Stella and Manny Silberberg on their way to a home built in a former stone quarry, on a mountainside in a northern New Jersey borough they had never heard of.
Moving from a raised ranch in Rockland County, N.Y., two years ago, the couple paid $462,500 for a two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment at Four Seasons at Great Notch, the largest and most upscale of the seven condominium communities in Woodland Park, a Passaic County borough situated on a ridge called the First Watchung Mountain.
Now the Silberbergs admire a soaring rock face from their breakfast nook. “In the morning, I open the window and feel the fresh air,” said Ms. Silberberg, 76, a retired travel agent. “It’s windy here, and you feel the elements.”
The view from the development’s clubhouse and pool is also dramatic: Manhattan’s towers, unobstructed.
“I can drive there in under a half-hour,” said Mr. Silberberg, 82, a retired New York City music teacher and a cellist with the Riverside Orchestra on the Upper West Side, who does just that.
Woodland Park, formerly West Paterson, is aptly named. A quarter of the hilly, three-square-mile borough of 12,600 is open space, much of it in two county parks. Additionally, there are about 10 municipal parks and two reservoirs. The Passaic River is the community’s western border.
“We see a tremendous amount of wildlife,” Mayor Keith Kazmark said, listing deer, fox, skunk, raccoon and possum. “I even had a coyote in my backyard six months ago. Our residents have to take precautions but, at the same time, the wildlife is of value because it speaks to the diversity of our landscape.”
Glenny and Kurtis Chiappone, both 35, appreciate the fauna because Mr. Chiappone, who works in information technology for a financial services company in Jersey City, dabbles in nature photography. They frequent Garret Mountain Reservation, 500 feet above sea level and the larger of the county parks, and can enter one of the municipal parks from the backyard of their circa-1954, four-bedroom Cape Cod, atop a steep road in the heart of the borough.
Previously renters in Denville, 20 miles to the west, the Chiappones looked at 50 properties in four counties before buying the Woodland Park house for $380,000 in 2018, the year before they became parents.
“The parks were certainly a perk for us,” Ms. Chiappone said. So, too, was the highway access and the 20-minute drive to her job as a school counselor in Hackensack, 10 miles to the east.
Recreational opportunities and relatively modest home prices make Woodland Park popular with first-time home buyers with children. Angela and Matt Shafer, who have twin 14-year-old daughters, bought their three-bedroom Cape in 2017, paying $314,500. Ms. Shafer, 45, who owns a bakery in neighboring Little Falls, and Mr. Shafer, 47, a sales manager for a paper-shredding company in Morris County, were not newcomers: They had been living in a house passed from Ms. Shafer’s grandmother to her mother.
“Every time we talked about crossing the town borders, our daughters were adamant about not leaving,” Ms. Shafer said. “There’s a small-town feeling here, and everybody knows everyone. With the youth sports, you might not have a kid on the team, but you still go to the games because you know the other kids.”
For a place with rugged topography, Woodland Park is hardly the sticks. The Route 46 shopping corridor runs along the southern border, and Interstate 80 cuts through the northwest corner. Primarily suburban, with rustic touches and office campuses, the borough also has a dense, urban side abutting Paterson, New Jersey’s third-largest city.
The housing stock largely dates to the mid-20th century, with lots of unpretentious Capes and ranches and an ample inventory of two-families and rental apartments. Homes in woodsier neighborhoods near the county parks sit on more generously sized lots.
The condominium communities, with a combined 1,180 units, are of varied sizes and styles. Tucked into the borough’s southeast corner is the age-restricted Four Seasons at Great Notch, which opened in 2006 where the Tilcon quarry operated for decades. It has 810 garden-, villa- and courtyard-style homes (100 with addresses in adjacent Clifton), as well as street names — Pebble, Granite, Boulder, Slate — right out of “The Flintstones.”
Christopher Leopizzi, a broker with Leopizzi Real Estate Agency in Woodland Park, said home prices start at around $300,000 and rise with the elevation. The least expensive properties are closest to the Passaic River, in a zone where flood insurance is required. (The last major flooding occurred during Hurricane Irene, in 2011.)
Besides empty-nesters downsizing to condos, “we see families upsizing from Paterson and other blue-collar areas,” Mr. Leopizzi said.
Last year, 63 single-family houses sold at a median price of $345,500, and 43 homes described as condominiums or townhouses sold at a median price of $445,500, compared with $340,000 and $446,975 in 2018, according to the New Jersey Multiple Listing Service.
On Jan. 30, the MLS website showed 10 single-family houses and 18 condominiums and townhouses on the market. The priciest listing, at $719,000, was a four-bedroom, three-bathroom condominium on Graphite Drive at Four Seasons at Great Notch, with $20,770 in annual property taxes and $425 in monthly maintenance. On Rifle Camp Road, a six-bedroom, two-bathroom ranch on an oversized lot was listed at $415,000, with property taxes of $8,240.
Hiking is an easy proposition in a borough abounding in parkland and that also has a greenway along the path of the old Morris Canal. Garret Mountain Reservation has an equestrian center, a fishing pond and picnic areas. Rifle Camp Park, also county-owned, has a nature observatory. The recently renovated municipal green spaces offer playgrounds, basketball courts, athletic fields, skateboard ramps and a gazebo for summer concerts.
What Woodland Park lacks is a central business district. Aside from chain retailers (Kohl’s and Barnes & Noble among them) on Route 46, most commerce is in strip malls and houses along McBride Avenue, which follows the bends of the Passaic River and runs underneath Interstate 80.
Dining options on the main drag include Francesco’s, a white-tablecloth Italian restaurant; Bamboo Village, a Cantonese spot with occasional karaoke; and King of Shish Kabob, which serves up Middle Eastern fare from a bungalow.
Mr. Kazmark, the mayor, said the ongoing beautification of McBride Avenue’s streetscape will get a boost this year when parts of the thoroughfare are declared in need of redevelopment.
The 1,100-student public school district is approximately 50 percent white, 40 percent Hispanic, 4 percent black and 3 percent Asian, and consists of two elementary schools — one for prekindergarten through second grade and one for third and fourth grades — and a middle school for fifth through eighth grades.
Students go on to Passaic Valley Regional High School in Little Falls, which enrolls 1,120 students. Average SAT scores in 2017-18 were 528 in reading and writing and 533 in math, versus 542 and 543 statewide.
Woodland Park is about 16 miles from the George Washington Bridge (via Interstate 80) and from the Lincoln Tunnel (via Routes 46 and 3), but it has no direct bus service to Manhattan. One option is to drive to the Allwood Park and Ride in Clifton and catch New Jersey Transit’s No. 192 bus to the Port Authority terminal; the ride takes at least 35 minutes and costs $6 one way, or $167 monthly.
Rail commuters can park at the Montclair State University station in Little Falls and take New Jersey Transit’s Montclair-Boonton Line train to Penn Station. Most trips are direct and take 50 minutes to an hour; the fare is $7.75 one way, or $227 monthly.
West Paterson broke off from Little Falls township in 1914. As struggles mounted in the city of Paterson, some in West Paterson agitated for the community to shed that name. Referendums to rename the borough Woodland Park, West Park and Garret Mountain failed in 1989, 1995 and 2001. Another try at the name Woodland Park succeeded in 2008. Not everyone has embraced the change: The fire department and first-aid squad have kept West Paterson in their names.