Judge Signals Approval of U.S.C.’s $215 Million Settlement With Ex-Gynecologist’s Patients
A federal judge in Los Angeles said this week that he was inclined to give final approval to the University of Southern California’s $215 million class-action settlement with former patients of Dr. George Tyndall, the campus gynecologist accused of sexual misconduct involving hundreds of patients during his decades-long tenure.
The judge, Stephen V. Wilson of United States District Court, said in court on Monday that he was “inclined to accept” the settlement, which would clear the way for the university to start writing checks to more than 18,000 women who saw Dr. Tyndall during their time at the university, according to lawyers involved in the case.
Under the terms of the settlement, each woman would be guaranteed a $2,500 payment, whether or not she had alleged abuse. Women who allege the worst abuse and would be willing to be screened by a psychologist could be eligible for payments of up to $250,000.
The university said in a statement that it was pleased with the court’s decision. “This settlement provides respectful and confidential relief to Tyndall patients at the student health center and formalizes a broad array of campus reforms,” the statement said.
Though Judge Wilson did not state when he would officially file the approval, it would be highly unusual for him to change his decision, said Annika Martin, an interim class counsel for former patients. Once the settlement is approved, the claims review process can begin and checks can be written — as long as no one files an appeal, she added.
“The process has been incredibly rapid,” Ms. Martin said. “Within two years of filing the lawsuit, we’ve got a settlement approved and are almost ready to send checks out. We tried really hard to listen to thousands of class members, and we made institutional changes to make sure this doesn’t happen again.”
The class-action lawsuit was filed in May 2018, Ms. Martin said. Within five months, the University of Southern California agreed to pay $215 million to settle the suit, and Judge Wilson granted preliminary approval of the settlement in June 2019. Then, notices were sent to more than 12,000 women who were examined by Dr. Tyndall, according to university records.
Because early records weren’t retained, notices were also sent to the more than 150,000 women who attended U.S.C. during the gynecologist’s tenure — 1989 to 2016 — classified as “potential class members,” according to Shon Morgan, a lawyer for the university. He described the lawsuit as the largest class-action sexual harassment suit, both in terms of number of people involved and the amount of the settlement.
Within months, thousands of women had filed claims.
Of the 18,000 people who responded, more than 3,000 submitted claim forms for more than the minimum amount. Nearly 800 people opted out of the settlement, most to pursue separate lawsuits in state court, according to court records.
A panel of experts, including a retired federal judge, an obstetrician gynecologist and a forensic psychologist, will evaluate the claims, conduct interviews and decide allocation amounts, Ms. Martin said. Lawyers for the patients and the university have until the end of the week to select the experts.
After an internal investigation conducted by U.S.C. concluded that the gynecologist’s behavior had amounted to sexually harassing patients, Dr. Tyndall, now 73, reached an agreement with the university and quietly resigned with a payout in 2017.
Although the university’s report found complaints against Dr. Tyndall dating back to at least 2000, it was not clear why he was allowed to retain his position. In 2018, C.L. Max Nikias, the university’s president at the time, stepped down after public backlash over the way school officials handled the issue.
Dr. Tyndall, who has denied wrongdoing, had his medical license suspended in August 2018 and was charged criminally in June 2019 with 29 total counts of sexual penetration and sexual battery by fraud. If convicted, he could face up to 53 years in prison. His license will expire on Jan. 31, according to the Medical Board of California.