‘You Picked Two!’: Parsing the Klobuchar-Warren Endorsement
To the Editor:
Re “Amy Klobuchar and Elizabeth Warren Are Democrats’ Top Choices for President” (editorial, Jan. 20):
As a potential Democratic primary voter, I don’t have the luxury of the two-choice option settled on by The Times. As the editorial predicted, there will be “those dissatisfied” with The Times’s decision. I’m in that category.
The policy differences between Senators Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar are stark and not fungible, and a choice requires reasoned decision making. Both women are smart, experienced public servants, and when it comes to character, either of them totally outshines the current president by a landslide. But policy notwithstanding, the ultimate criterion for the Democratic candidate must be electability. The Trump scourge, for the good of the country, must be eliminated.
In that regard, Ms. Klobuchar has a decided edge. Your editorial describes her bipartisan accomplishments — not flashy but “meaningful.” Her Midwestern roots, electoral success, basic likability and apparent solidity are assets that can more easily morph into electability in the vital swing states.
Ms. Warren, while admirably passionate about her policies, nonetheless appears unduly rigid and unlikely to expand her base. The Times should have endorsed Ms. Klobuchar over Ms. Warren.
Jay Adolf
New York
To the Editor:
Having read all the interviews with the Democratic candidates currently leading in the polls, I was amazed to see The Times’s editorial staff so thoughtfully navigate the complexity of choosing among them for an endorsement.
While many may see your unwillingness to endorse a single candidate as a deflection, your deference to these two particular candidates has given us a road map for not one but two ways out of the wilderness in which we find ourselves. That road map also clearly challenges us to have that long-awaited debate about who we are as a nation and decide where we are going.
David Simpson
Rindge, N.H.
To the Editor:
Not since the Civil War has America faced such a crisis. The very essence of America is at stake. Nothing is more important than defeating Donald Trump in November. How disappointing to see The Times endorse two individuals who have far less chance to defeat Mr. Trump than former Vice President Joe Biden. The Times has assisted Mr. Trump in his re-election bid. Even worse, you punted. You picked two!
Robert B. Yudin
Wyckoff, N.J.
The writer is former chairman of the Bergen County Republican Organization.
To the Editor:
Televising the editorial board’s Democratic primary endorsement decision on “The Weekly” on Sunday night turned out to be eye-opening — in all the wrong ways. From immaterial questions (“Who broke your heart?,” apparently asked of each candidate, and cruelly asked of Joe Biden) to the silly high school canvass of votes (“Write down your top two!”), the show had all the gravitas of bad reality TV. There was scant insight for those of us still deciding between Democrats.
Next time, please spare us the view of the sausage making and make a damn choice.
Kristin Huckshorn
Boca Raton, Fla.
To the Editor:
I’ve been reading the transcripts of the interviews that the editorial board conducted with several of the major Democratic candidates for president. Until your interview with Pete Buttigieg, they were, for the most part, friendly and collegial. The interview with Mr. Buttigieg, which started with his stint at McKinsey & Company, was so hostile that it took my breath away. You would have thought his joining McKinsey as an entry-level employee was the equivalent of his traveling off to Syria to join ISIS.
Donald Lubin
Greenwich, N.J.
To the Editor:
Bravo! Great job! You bucked tradition and, as far as I’m concerned, you nailed it. I could feel the editorial board’s passion about this election and the need for change in the explanation of why you made your choices. Yes! May the best woman win.
Michele Postal
Eugene, Ore.
To the Editor:
After reading your Feb. 23 article “Klobuchar’s Taunts and Temper Stand Out in Sea of Tough Bosses,” I cannot agree with your endorsement. This describes a fatal flaw in her personality. Can you imagine her in high-level meetings berating people who displease or disagree with her? If she cannot even handle her aides diplomatically, she should not lead the nation. We do not need this after what we have been through with President Trump.
I fear that your desire for a woman president has swayed your decision.
Steve Gill
Port Ludlow, Wash.
To the Editor:
As a strong supporter of Senator Elizabeth Warren, I suppose I should be unconditionally delighted that she shares in your endorsement for the Democratic nomination. But I am concerned that you have described the race as one between a radical and a realist.
The Democrats offer a choice between centrists with realistic goals and progressives with realistic goals. Ms. Warren has the clearest plans for accomplishing hers, as you noted. Each will have an easier time accomplishing these if Democrats win more Senate seats; each is likely to encounter problems along the way; each will take us toward a better world.
Senator Amy Klobuchar has tried to make the case that she is a realist in a world of extremists — Donald Trump on the one hand, Ms. Warren and Bernie Sanders on the other — setting up a bizarre false equivalency. There is nothing unrealistic about Ms. Warren or her plans.
Davi Napoleon
Ann Arbor, Mich.
To the Editor:
Thank you for laying out the case for Amy Klobuchar. I’m only sorry that you included Elizabeth Warren in the endorsement. If Ms. Warren is the nominee, there will be a similar issue that Hillary Clinton had with Bernie Sanders supporters. Mr. Sanders, I believe, was a factor in Mrs. Clinton’s loss. The Warren and Sanders camps are needed for a Democratic victory and will unite only if some other candidate wins the primary contest.
Amy Klobuchar with Cory Booker as her vice president would be the ideal combination for speaking to and rallying African-American and Midwest constituents. May it be so.
Elizabeth Bjorkman
Lexington, Mass.
To the Editor:
The editorial board has defied its mission by endorsing both Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar. As The Times has stated, the editorial board differs from the newsroom in that the newsroom describes the world as it is and the editorial board describes the world as it should be. At this moment in history rife with division, the public did not need a mirror on its collective confusion but rather a clear and concise vision for what a Democratic nominee should be.
By endorsing two candidates, however, the editorial board has endorsed no one. The moderate/liberal pair could just have easily been Biden/Sanders. Choosing the two female candidates to “split the spotlight” rings of sexism and makes this lukewarm endorsement even that much more disappointing.
Lisa Glahn
Marblehead, Mass.
To the Editor:
Thank you for your work in publishing interviews with Democratic candidates and for your endorsement editorial. Both are thought-provoking and valuable contributions to the selection of presidential candidates.
However, rather than simply conceding that Donald Trump “will nearly certainly coast to the nomination,” it would also be useful to hear about William Weld’s background, qualifications and policy positions. He deserves enormous credit for having the rare courage to challenge Mr. Trump from within the party and should be heard for that reason alone. And Republicans need to know that they have within their ranks at least one good alternative to four more years of the mayhem we’ve seen from the current administration.
Frederick W. Deichmann
Mystic, Conn.
To the Editor:
If the brilliant and exceedingly well-informed members of the Times editorial board cannot make up their mind whom to vote for, what hope is there for the typical voter?
Ron Boyer
Eugene, Ore.