Remains Found on California Mountain Belonged to Manzanar Detainee
Nearly 75 years ago, Giichi Matsumura left the grounds of the Manzanar War Relocation Center in California with a group of fishermen who had set out for the lakes of the Sierra Nevada.
After a few days, Mr. Matsumura, 46, broke off from the group to paint and sketch. He had taken up art in Manzanar, one of 10 internment camps the United States government set up in the wake of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, and where Mr. Matsumura and his family had been forced to relocate by the Army.
A sudden storm moved in. When it subsided, the fishermen went looking for Mr. Matsumura.
His body was found a month later, near a lake on Mount Williamson, California’s second-highest peak. But he was too far from safe terrain to be moved, and his remains would stay buried under gray boulders for decades, until last October, when two hikers who had gone off track stumbled upon them.
On Friday, officials from the Inyo County Sheriff’s Office and the Manzanar National Historic Site confirmed in a statement that the remains belonged to Mr. Matsumura.
“After 74 years, we were quite shocked when we heard about a hiker finding his grave,” Bernadette Johnson, superintendent of the Manzanar National Historic Site, said in the statement. “We hope that his family will have some closure and peace now that a positive identification has been made by the Inyo County Sheriff’s Office.”
Park officials had long known about the makeshift burial site, which was listed in books about Manzanar and in National Park Service publications.
After his body was first found, on Sept. 3, 1945, the project director at the camp sent hikers up the mountain to bury his remains. Mr. Matsumura’s wife, Ito, gave them a sheet with which to cover his body.
“They had to leave him there,” his daughter, Kazue Matsumura, later told the National Park Service. “You couldn’t bring him down from there because it’s too high.”
His family often returned to Manzanar to honor his memory but lamented being unable to travel to the remote location of his grave, Kazue Matsumura said.
Even after his skeleton was found in October, authorities struggled to recover it because of the tough terrain and high winds in the eastern Sierra.
Nine days after the hikers found the remains, they were moved by air and transported to the Inyo County Coroner’s Office.
The authorities said they did not suspect foul play.
Officials from the Inyo County Sheriff’s Office identified the remains by comparing his DNA with a sample from one of his grandchildren, The Associated Press reported.
“It’s overwhelming,” Bonnie Matsumura, the oldest of Mr. Matsumura’s grandchildren, said in a phone interview. “It’s fascinating because it’s part of history and it’s a part of his family’s history.”
Mr. Matsumura, a father of three boys and one girl, was among the approximately 120,000 Japanese-Americans held in internment camps during World War II after being ordered by the United States government to leave their jobs and homes.
More than 11,000 Japanese-Americans were forced to move to Manzanar.
At the time Mr. Matsumura disappeared, people living in Manzanar were free to move about as they pleased and had been told by government officials they could leave.
Giichi and Ito Matsumura had decided to stay.
“The Matsumuras, like many families incarcerated during the war, had no home or business to return to and so they continued living in Manzanar,” according to the joint statement.
The day Mr. Matsumura left with the fishermen, his wife tried to stop him, Bonnie Matsumura said.
“My grandmother didn’t want him to go because the weather was turning,” she said. “But he still went. He loved to paint. That was his enjoyment.”
The disappearance of her husband devastated Ito Matsumura, who stopped eating and whose black hair turned white from the stress, Kazue Matsumura recalled in her interview with the National Park Service.
Bonnie Matsumura said her grandfather’s two eldest sons went with a search party to find him. Her father, Uwao, was sick with appendicitis and could not join them.
The discovery of the body was featured in The Manzanar Free Press, a newspaper that reported on camp news. The paper said Mr. Matsumura had died of exposure.
Ito Matsumura wrote a notice in the paper thanking “the residents of Manzanar for their kindness in searching for Giichi Matsumura, who was lost in the mountains.”
A month after he was found, his family returned to Santa Monica, where they had been living before the relocation orders. The government shut down the camp permanently on Nov. 21, 1945.
Ito Matsumura worked two to three jobs to feed her children, Kazue Matsumura told the park service.
“She worked really hard,” she said. “That’s why I took care of my mom until she died.”
“She sacrificed for us, so I sacrificed for her.”
Ito Matsumura died at 102 in 2005 and was buried at Woodlawn Cemetery in Santa Monica. Bonnie Matsumura said the family was still deciding on burial arrangements for her grandfather.
“There is a place for him where my grandmother was buried,” said Bonnie Matsumura, who has paintings of her grandfather’s at her home in Las Vegas. Many of them are watercolors of the scenic views around Manzanar and the camp barracks.
“He was an excellent painter,” she said.