The Portraits That Gave Impeachment a Different Look
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
The impeachment of President Trump presented a challenge for photographers: a gravely historic moment in our democracy with limited freedom to document the process.
Over a few days late last month, the seven House Democratic impeachment managers — Representatives Jason Crow, Val B. Demings, Sylvia R. Garcia, Hakeem Jeffries, Zoe Lofgren, Jerrold Nadler, Adam B. Schiff — and four members of the president’s defense team — Ken Starr, an independent counsel; Pat A. Cipollone, the White House counsel; and the lawyers Alan M. Dershowitz and Jay Sekulow — agreed to be photographed.
The House managers were photographed in  Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s conference room. Mr. Cipollone and Mr. Sekulow were photographed in the vice president’s ceremonial office in the Senate. Mr. Starr visited The Times’s Washington Bureau and Mr. Dershowitz was photographed at his hotel. Erin Schaff, a Times photographer in Washington, made the pictures. Marisa Schwartz Taylor, the Washington bureau photo editor, edited the project. They recently discussed the process over the phone. Their lightly edited conversation appears below.
What have the restrictions been during the impeachment trial?
ERIN SCHAFF We are not allowed to take photos in the Senate chamber. And they’re keeping us in penned sections while the senators are in the hallway. This makes it much more difficult than usual for us to do our jobs. The elected officials who will decide whether or not to impeach the president can now avoid the press if they would like to. Normally there aren’t very many restrictions on journalists in the Capitol.
These photographs have a sense of stillness in a time when the news moves rapidly. Did you know what you wanted the project to look like before it began?
MARISA SCHWARTZ TAYLOR We wanted a way to slow down the story and give readers a new entry point, maybe the people who weren’t following the impeachment every single day.
SCHAFF When this was on the House side I spent about a week with the House Judiciary Committee as they reviewed the drafted  articles of impeachment. When things went over to the Senate we thought about how we could do it from that side, given all of the restrictions on photography and that the senators are on the floor all day (where we also have no photo access).
SCHWARTZ TAYLOR Once they named the House managers who were going to be prosecuting the case, we knew we wanted to do a portrait project. We came up with the idea of black-and-white portraits that are stark and focus on expression — details reminiscent of the portraits made by Richard Avedon, a photographer who shot powerful people.
SCHAFF We wanted everybody to be portrayed as in one space, and I wanted to give equal weight to each picture. And I wanted the whole series to feel cohesive in lighting, style and backdrop.
SCHWARTZ TAYLOR We weren’t sure about the access that we were going to get so we wanted a lighting style and backdrop that we could set up in any situation. They’re very strong portraits but it’s a very simple photography setup.
How did you work with each subject on set? The picture of Jay Sekulow, for instance. He looks very comfortable.
SCHAFF I just asked them if they were comfortable and how they wanted to pose. I told them that they didn’t need to put on a fake smile for a head shot. Everything was very fluid.
I saw him adjust his glasses in between shots and immediately knew I needed that photo.
SCHWARTZ TAYLOR We really wanted the pictures to show each person’s personality and what they bring to the case. And you want variety of scale and people looking in different directions.
You said your approach was inspired by Richard Avedon, who was known for distinctive portraits. Do you think readers can pick up on that reference without explicitly knowing his work?
SCHWARTZ TAYLOR There’s kind of a cultural consciousness of what striking portraits look like and what power looks like. I think that is something people definitely understand. You can see in these portraits that the subjects are giving the photographer time and not just rushing off somewhere. They are engaging with the photographer in the project.