Klobuchar and Booker Raise More Money but Trail Far Behind 2020 Leaders
HANOVER, N.H. — Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota raised $11.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, her campaign announced on Friday, a sum that was more than twice what she collected during the prior three months but still left her no better than sixth in fund-raising for the last three months among Democrats running for president.
Trailing her, Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey announced that his campaign had raised $6.6 million in the same period, from October through December. That total, revealed by the candidate after a campaign event in New Hampshire, was the best of any quarter for the Booker campaign but was just one-fifth of Senator Bernie Sanders’s haul, which led the field.
Both senators have invested significant resources in Iowa, the first nominating state, but their fund-raising numbers revealed the yawning gap in financial resources between the top candidates in the race and everyone else.
Still, Ms. Klobuchar’s team sought to portray her fourth-quarter total as evidence of momentum for her campaign. Late last month, Ms. Klobuchar completed her tour of all 99 Iowa counties, becoming the second Democratic presidential candidate to hold an event in each county after former Representative John Delaney of Maryland.
Ms. Klobuchar now has more than 80 staff members in Iowa and 30 in New Hampshire, but little presence in Nevada, South Carolina and the big states that follow on the primary calendar in March.
“Our campaign has seen a massive surge in grass-roots support, and this has allowed us to make critical campaign investments,” said Justin Buoen, Ms. Klobuchar’s campaign manager. “As we head into 2020, Amy for America is building momentum and a strong grass-roots operation that can win big in 2020.”
The Klobuchar campaign also released a 60-second television advertisement on Friday highlighting her moderate image. “If you feel stuck in the middle of the extremes in our politics and you’re tired of the noise and the nonsense,” she says in the ad, “you’ve got a home with me.”
Mr. Booker’s campaign aides have said his fourth-quarter fund-raising was helped by a well-reviewed performance in the November debate and Senator Kamala Harris’s exit from the race. More than 50 percent of the money he raised in the last three months came from first-time donors, according to his campaign.
On Friday, Mr. Booker noted that the recent departure of Julián Castro, as well as Ms. Harris, was also driving some new interest in his campaign. “At a time that we’re seeing the kind of voices that represent the diversity of our party, that represent the lived experiences of our party, begin to fall out, this is a time that people are realizing that my voice is essential in the campaign itself, and the best as a candidate to pull out the fullness of the Obama coalition,” he told reporters in New Hampshire.
But Mr. Booker failed to qualify for the December debate, which likely cost him the opportunity to collect more donations that come with the visibility of a nationally televised event. And he remains in danger of missing the next debate, scheduled for Jan. 14; while he has met one requirement by amassing at least 225,000 individual donors, his campaign has not notched a single qualifying poll.
Ms. Klobuchar is one of five candidates who have qualified for the next debate, joining former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., Mr. Sanders of Vermont, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind. Each of the four raised far more than Ms. Klobuchar, based on statements from their campaigns.
Mr. Sanders’s campaign announced that it had raised $34.5 million during the fourth quarter. Mr. Buttigieg’s campaign said that it had raised $24.7 million. Mr. Biden’s campaign announced that it had raised $22.7 million. And Ms. Warren’s campaign said that it had raised $21.2 million.
The businessman Andrew Yang, who has yet to qualify for the January debate, raised $16.5 million during the fourth quarter, his campaign said. Two billionaires running for the nomination, Michael R. Bloomberg and Tom Steyer, are self-funding their campaigns.
Mr. Booker’s campaign still commands a staff of about 50 in Iowa, many of whom have been working in the state since the summer, as well as roughly 30 staff members in New Hampshire and 20 in both Nevada and South Carolina.
The campaign has put some of its influx of cash toward airing its first television ad in Iowa, spending more than $300,000 so far, with the goal of boosting Mr. Booker’s poll numbers in the state to help qualify him for the January debate.
“We’re thrilled to have closed out 2019 with our best fund-raising quarter yet, despite not being able to join the December debate stage due to the artificial thresholds that prevented viable candidates from participating,” Addisu Demissie, Mr. Booker’s campaign manager, said in a statement. “But to put it bluntly, we’re still behind the fund-raising of a field of predominantly white candidates who have been able to haul in significantly greater sums of money or tap into their personal fortunes to fund their campaigns.”