What We Learned in the N.F.L.’s Conference Championships
The Tennessee Titans were lovable underdogs, but their luck ran out on Sunday against the Kansas City Chiefs, who beat them, 35-24. The Green Bay Packers found some balance on offense in their first season under Coach Matt LaFleur, but they were crushed by the San Francisco 49ers, 37-20, in a game that was nowhere near that close. The Chiefs and the 49ers will now face off in Super Bowl LIV on Feb. 2 in Miami Gardens, Fla., in a matchup between one team with an electric passing game and one that relies on its defense and running the ball.
Here’s what we learned in the conference championship games.
The 49ers are currently underdogs and will be the road team in Miami Gardens, Fla. It will be the team’s third Super Bowl in the stadium formerly known as Joe Robbie, with San Francisco having beaten the Cincinnati Bengals there in Super Bowl XXIII and having defeated the San Diego Chargers there in Super Bowl XXIX.
San Francisco 49ers (13-3) at Kansas City Chiefs (12-4)
Sunday, Feb. 2, 6:30 p.m. Eastern, Fox
Early Line: Chiefs -1.5
Aaron Rodgers passed for 326 yards while trying to rally Green Bay in a blowout against San Francisco. But there was no question who the best quarterback on either field was this week, as Mahomes threw for 294 yards, had a sparkling passer rating of 120.4, and seemed capable of even more production if Kansas City had needed it.
All of the talk coming into this week was about Tennessee’s Derrick Henry, but it was San Francisco’s Mostert who put on an absolute show. He had the second-most rushing yards in a playoff game since at least 1950 (Eric Dickerson had 248 in the divisional round following the 1985 season) and also scored the second-most rushing touchdowns in a playoff game over the same span (Ricky Watters had five for San Francisco in the divisional round following the 1993 season).
The Packers’ Davante Adams led all receivers with 138 yards this week, but much of it came in garbage time, while Kansas City’s duo of Watkins and Tyreek Hill used their speed to disassemble Tennessee’s defense. The Titans did not have a player with more than 65 yards, and San Francisco had two players tie for the team lead in receptions — with two. An honorable mention is warranted to Tennessee’s backup tackle Dennis Kelly, who at 321 pounds became the heaviest player to score a receiving touchdown in a postseason game.