What’s on TV Monday: ‘Honeyland’ and ‘Accept the Call’
HONEYLAND (2019) Stream on Hulu. Rent on Amazon, Google Play, Vudu and YouTube. Hatidze Muratova is one of the last of her kind. She and her ailing mother are the only inhabitants of a small village in the Republic of North Macedonia, where Muratova makes a quiet living keeping bees. She practices the sustainable beekeeping methods of generations before her, like singing to her bees and making sure to only take half their honey. Then a family moves in next door, bringing with them cattle, several children, bees of their own and a threat to Muratova’s way of life, and the filmmakers Tamara Kotevska and Ljubomir Stefanov capture a story at the intersection of modernity and tradition. “Their movie is quiet, intimate and intense, but touched with a breath of epic grandeur,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The New York Times. “It’s a poem including history.”
LA STRADA (1956) Stream on Criterion. Directed by the legendary Federico Fellini, “La Strada” has been a highly regarded emblem of Italian cinema for over 60 years. It stars Giulietta Masina (Fellini’s wife) as Gelsomina, a simple woman who was sold by her mother into the servitude of Zampanò, a circus strongman played by Anthony Quinn. The pair travel from town to town, with Gelsomina providing an opening act to the strongman’s, until they encounter a tightrope artist who baits the strongman into violence. A comment on the innately human desire for companionship, the story is a “picaresque parable,” A.H. Weiler wrote for The Times in 1956, the year the film won an Academy Award for best foreign language film.
ACCEPT THE CALL (2019) 10 p.m. on PBS. Yusuf Abdurahman fled civil war in Somalia in 1992. He settled in Minnesota, and he raised his son, Zacharia, in one of the largest Somali communities in the United States. In 2015, Zacharia was arrested — along with five other Somali-Americans in Minnesota — after an attempt to join ISIS in Syria. The filmmaker Eunice Lau tells Zacharia’s story through the eyes of his father, who, in trying to understand his son’s actions, unearths a harsh reality of targeted recruitment in his community and the struggles of growing up Muslim in the face of America’s “war on terror.”
PRODIGAL SON 9:01 p.m. on FOX. Tom Payne plays Malcolm Bright, your standard charming, wickedly intelligent N.Y.P.D. detective in this series, which is back for the rest of Season 1. The twist: Bright’s estranged father, Dr. Martin Whitly (Michael Sheen), is a convicted (and imprisoned) serial killer known as the Surgeon — and he has a copy cat. This season, Malcolm reconnected with his father to solve the murders, and the two have become a team. Now, Malcolm is being held hostage and the F.B.I. bands with the police to save him with help from Ainsley (Halston Sage) and Jessica (Bellamy Young).