Iraq Police Crack Down on Protests as Influential Cleric Withdraws Support
BAGHDAD — Iraqi government security forces on Saturday took back ground from protesters in Baghdad and Basra, in an apparent bid to quell the demonstrations that have lasted for nearly four months amid calls for new elections and an end to government corruption.
In Baghdad, security forces moved on two of the smaller protest sites and approached the central one, Tahrir Square, before falling back, but fired tear gas and bullets, wounding at least four. Across the country, at least four were killed and 13 injured on Saturday.
The government’s move to clear protesters came after the prominent Shiite cleric, Moktada al-Sadr, announced in a tweet on Friday that he was withdrawing support for the demonstrators and would no longer intervene on their behalf. He said his move was a result of what he called the antagonistic behavior of some of the protesters toward his followers.
His withdrawal of support, and the resulting departure of many  of his followers from the demonstrations, deprived the protests of a critical base of participants, leaving those remaining more vulnerable to a government crackdown.
There was a significant exodus of Mr. Sadr’s followers from Basra, a key city in Iraq’s majority-Shiite south. There, the police moved into the main protest square after Mr. Sadr’s followers left, setting fire to tents and leaving behind piles of ashes, burned blankets and bare metal tent frames.
“We can say Basra is over,” said Juma al-Hamdani, a civil society activist who runs a nongovernmental organization there and had been protesting since the beginning of October. “I am heartbroken.”
Mr. al-Hamdani blamed the loss of Mr. Sadr’s support for the retreat of protesters. “I thought he had changed his behavior but what is a pity is that he disappointed us.”
In cities across the south, where protesters had a smaller presence, some of his followers removed tents.
However, the situation was fluid and in some locations just hours after Mr. Sadr’s supporters disappeared, students and workers supportive of the protesters turned up to try to fill the gap.
The result was clearly visible. Even in Basra, against the odds, some of the protesters — minus Mr. Sadr’s followers — had returned by Saturday evening.
In Baghdad, the security forces had succeeded in considerably constricting the spaces where protests had been occurring — a long standing plan of the security forces and factions in the government who wanted to see the protests end.
But there were still thousands of protesters on the streets in the capital, even though Mr. Sadr’s supporters had removed most of their tents which had provided shelter and medical care to protesters.
Maj. Gen. Tahsin al-Khafaji, the Iraqi spokesman for the Joint Command in Baghdad, insisted that the removal of protesters in the capital, along with their tents and installations at a few of the popular protest gathering sites, was being done “cooperatively.”
But tear gas fogged the air and protesters brandishing Molotov cocktails periodically ran through Baghdad’s streets as the security forces shot into the air to move the protesters back.
At least 500 protesters have been killed and thousands have been wounded since the demonstrations began in the fall.
Mr. Sadr’s followers and the students and civil society activists who are protesting represent two influential strands in Iraq — with the latter representing an outward looking, generally more urban and educated community; and the Sadrists a poorer urban tranche with roots in rural areas.
The two together gave the protests staying power, and the collective protection of their numbers, but their cultural differences made them deeply wary of each other.
The protesters who held their ground on Saturday expressed at once regret that the Sadrists had left and scorn that they had obeyed a cleric’s orders, but most of all they criticized Mr. Sadr for what they deemed inconsistent support.
Mr. Sadr never called on his followers to join the demonstrations, but he strongly supported most of the protesters’ demands, especially the removal of corrupt politicians and the provision of more services and jobs.
“He doesn’t know what he wants, he puts one leg here and another leg there,” said Ali Hussein, 22, a student at Mustansiriya University, who is from Sadr City, but not in favor of Mr. Sadr.
“In Sadr City, his followers will keep following him blindly,” Mr. Hussein said. “But those who have awareness, most of whom are students, he lost them.”
In the 17 years of Mr. Sadr’s participation in the Iraqi political scene, he has demonstrated repeatedly that he is influential and has the power to shake up the status quo.
His followers had presented themselves as protectors of the protesters — whether nor not that was consistently the case — so their withdrawal implicitly opened the way for those antagonistic to the demonstrators, including the Iraqi government forces, to move in.
Mr. Sadr is also well known in Iraq for his sizable militia, known as Soraya Salaam, or the Peace Brigades, who although they did not come to the protest squares armed, represented a veiled threat to the government and others who wanted to see the protesters removed.
Some Sadrists who were traveling to Baghdad from the south of Iraq to participate in Friday’s demonstration against the American military presence in Iraq said they were insulted or even blocked by non-Sadrists as they tried to join in. The civil society protesters have tended to be less anti-American.
In explaining his reason for withdrawal, his spokesman, Sheikh Saleh al-Obaidi, said it was meant to be more of an “admonishment” to the protesters from civil society and implicitly, to other secular and less anti-American protesters, to treat Mr. Sadr’s followers better.
“If there is a kind of apology from the demonstrators or a request made for him to come back, maybe things can start again,” said Mr. al-Obaidi.
Falih Hassan contributed from Baghdad.