Deciding When to Downsize and Move to the City
Q: In the 1980s, when our children were very young, my husband and I left Park Slope, Brooklyn, for Levittown to raise our family, even though neither of us were from Long Island. Our children are now grown and have moved back to the city, where we visit them frequently. We’re interested in moving back to Brooklyn, but we’re torn. We’re in our early 60s, so how would we adjust to being renters again? Or to owning an apartment rather than a house? I’d miss having a backyard and my husband likes coming home to the suburbs. When do we know it’s time to move?
A: Sometimes, the decision to move is made for you: New love combines two homes. A job leads you to a new city. A baby demands more space. It’s harder when the choice is all yours.
Right now, you need more information about what you want and what’s available. Talk to a financial adviser about your long term goals and how selling your house and buying a new one could impact them. Talk to local real estate brokers and ask them to evaluate your home and its listing price. How quickly are homes are selling near you, and for what prices? Visit local open houses to assess your competition.
If you’re particularly attached to the house, ask what the rental market is like for a home of your size in Levittown and what kind of rental income you could get. Ask your tax planner about the implications of changing a primary residency into a rental.
Once you have all that information, visit open houses in Brooklyn. Look at some rentals, too. Treat the process like an educational exercise: You’re gathering information, not making a decision. “Get in touch with the market,” said Alexander Glazer, a salesman at Douglas Elliman in Greenwich, Conn. “See what’s out there.”
Take a long vacation in Brooklyn, staying in an apartment rather than a hotel so you can experience what your daily life might be like. If you decide to leave Levittown, put the house on the market, or rent it out for a year while you test the waters in Brooklyn. (If you decide to rent, consider property management costs and ask yourself if you have the time and energy to be a landlord.)
If you do sell the house, speak to your financial adviser about whether it makes sense to wait to buy another property. New York is a city of renters, so why not try out this new life before you commit to it? Maybe you’ll prefer the flexibility. If not, you could always buy an apartment later.
“Take baby steps,” said Kathy Braddock, a managing director of the New York City office of William Raveis. “You want to keep yourself as nimble and flexible as possible until you’re pretty sure of what you want.”