What’s on TV Saturday: ‘Seven Worlds, One Planet’ and ‘Little America’
SEVEN WORLDS, ONE PLANET 9 p.m. on AMC, BBC America, IFC and Sundance TV. This new nature documentary series is narrated by none other than the veteran broadcaster and natural historian Sir David Attenborough. Each of the seven episodes spotlights how life developed on a different continent, as well as the factors threatening its biodiversity. This premiere focuses on Australia and its native animals, such as the eastern grey kangaroo and the Tasmanian devil. (The episode was filmed before bush fires started ravaging large swaths of the country but includes information on how to support relief efforts.) There is certainly no shortage of nature documentaries out there — some scenes in “Seven Worlds” have already been featured in the Netflix series “Our Planet.” Even so, in his review for The New York Times, Mike Hale wrote that “‘Seven Worlds’ is full of the usual beauty and spectacle.”
GODZILLA: KING OF THE MONSTERS (2019) 8 p.m. on HBO; stream on HBO platforms. If the grand visual effects of kaiju films are enough to keep you glued to the screen, this sequel to “Godzilla” (2014) is worth a watch. That is to say that it may not offer much in terms of dialogue or story, but it does propel the franchise forward and set the stage for “Godzilla vs. Kong,” due in November. Directed by Michael Dougherty, “King of the Monsters” sees the rise of Monster Zero, who turns out to be King Ghidorah — a three-headed creature that summons other kaiju to destroy the world. Ghidorah comes up against Godzilla and Mothra, while a broken family (played by Mark Russell, Vera Farmiga and Millie Bobby Brown) takes sides in the monster showdown.
LITTLE AMERICA Stream on Apple TV Plus. This new anthology series may not have the star power of Apple TV Plus’s “The Morning Show,” but it does have the draw of true stories that are relevant as ever in today’s political climate. (And support from producers like Kumail Nanjiani and Alan Yang doesn’t hurt.) Inspired by a series of articles in Epic Magazine about immigrants in the United States, the eight-part first season features episodes on a baker from Uganda who opens her own business; an Indian boy whose parents are deported, leaving him in charge of their motel; and a gay Syrian refugee who is granted asylum. Each tale touches on hardships and triumphs, both big and small, that make up the immigrant experience. And there’s more stories to come: The show was renewed for a second season before it even debuted on Jan. 17.
SEX EDUCATION Stream on Netflix. This charming British comedy centers on an awkward high school student (Asa Butterfield) who uses the wisdom he’s gleaned from his mother, a sex therapist, to start a sex therapy clinic at his school. In Season 2, he navigates a new relationship and considers stepping away from the business.