New & Noteworthy Visual Books, From Anne Brontë to Federico Fellini
THE TENANT OF WILDFELL HALL, by Anne Brontë. (Folio, $67.95.) To celebrate Brontë’s 200th birthday, a new edition of her second novel — an instant hit when it was published in 1848 — with an introduction by Tracy Chevalier and illustrations by Valentina Catto.
SUPREME, by James Jebbia. (Phaidon, $49.95.) It’s hard to ignore Supreme’s resurgence of late, the iconic white letters on a red rectangle signifying so much more than just the Downtown skater haven that started it all 25 years ago. The founder takes an 800-image look back on the movement he helped cultivate.
JAPANESE WOODBLOCK PRINTS (1680-1938), by Andreas Marks. (Taschen, $200.) A quarter-millennium’s worth of prints (depicting everything from sumo wrestlers and courtesans to elegant landscapes) reveal the evolving tastes of Japanese artists over the ages, and the impact of this art form on global culture.
FACE: A Visual Odyssey, by Jessica Helfand. (MIT, $39.95.) What does the mug shot have to do with the selfie? With faces everywhere in our image-obsessed society, self-photographed and otherwise, Helfand’s historical and critical approach helpfully zooms out.
FEDERICO FELLINI: The Book of Dreams, edited by Sergio Toffetti, with Felice Laudadio and Gianluca Farinelli. (Rizzoli, $115.) The head of Italy’s national film museum updates Fellini’s diaries with a critical introduction and new design.
I live in California, but I have lately been thinking a lot about Montana, where I grew up. My childhood seems far away all of a sudden, maybe (obviously) because my dad died a few months ago. The more I grab at happy boyhood memories, the more they disintegrate. An old friend, one I first met as a teenager, has helped me wrap my head around these feelings: MY ÁNTONIA, Willa Cather’s classic novel about a fancy New York lawyer trying to re-establish a connection to his past — back to his early years on the Nebraska prairie and deep friendship with Ántonia Shimerda, a vivacious immigrant. Cather’s novel has become newly relevant in the Trump era because of the way Ántonia and other immigrants are treated in their new country. For me, at least at this moment in my life, the relationship between past and present is what makes the story so powerful — how your (warped?) memories of yesterday shape your today.
—Brooks Barnes, Hollywood reporter