Riz Ahmed and Kahlil Joseph Among New Faces in BAM’s New Season
Riz Ahmed, Constanza Macras and Kahlil Joseph are among the performers and artists who will make their Brooklyn Academy of Music debuts in the arts center’s coming season. The slate, announced on Tuesday, also includes BAM favorites like Reggie Wilson and Steve Reich.
David Binder, the organization’s artistic director, explained that the inclusion of new and diverse talent was essential to communicating theme of the season, “Yours Theirs Ours,” which refers to voices that he feels are too often ignored.
“What we’re trying to do is move toward the idea of coming together and providing platforms for artists to express their truths and tell their stories in a world where people are being silenced, disempowered and shut down,” said Mr. Binder in an interview on Monday.
The season’s encouraging theme, he added, was inspired by the affirmative message of David Byrne’s “American Utopia” and the song “The World Is Yours” by the rapper Nas.
The season will begin March 23 with the opening of Mr. Joseph’s “BLKNWS,” a continuously updated two-channel video installation that looks at current events “through a Black lens.” It will be on view at BAM through June 21 and will also be shown at the Weeksville Heritage Center in the Crown Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn. (The Old Vic’s production of Duncan Macmillan’s play “Lungs,” starring Claire Foy and Matt Smith, will be the season’s first performing arts offering.)
In April, Mr. Ahmed, known for his acting roles in “The Night Of” and “Rogue One: A Star Wars Story,” will perform two concerts of his politically charged hip-hop music at a secret location that will only be announced to ticket holders. Later in the month, Ms. Macras’s “Open for Everything,” an impressionistic dance-theater piece about European Roma communities, will receive its American premiere. Five members of Ms. Macras’s company, DorkyPark, will be joined onstage by 17 Roma performers.
Other notable newcomers to BAM next season include the experimental electronic musician Holly Herndon (March 27); Candoco, a dance company from the United Kingdom that is committed to integrating disabled dancers into its work (April 10-11); and Tanya Tagaq, an Inuit throat singer who has adapted her debut novel “Split Tooth” with the help of the director Kaneza Schaal and the visual artist Christopher Myers (June 3-6).
For the full season lineup and more information, visit bam.org.