The Long Battle With Iran
Was the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, commander of Iran’s elite Quds Force, an act of war? If it was, it was a war in which the United States and Iran were already joined.
That war goes back to Lebanon in the early 1980s, where General Suleimani’s predecessors created what became Hezbollah. Iran, with Syria, helped stage the 1983 bombings of the American Embassy and Marine barracks in Beirut that killed 241 Americans involved in a peacekeeping mission. As a young Foreign Service officer who survived those bombings, I saw how Iran succeeded in forcing the United States to withdraw its forces from Lebanon through terrorism.
Later, as ambassador in Lebanon, I helped load the remains of two Americans killed by Hezbollah — the Beirut C.I.A. station chief, William Buckley, and Marine Lt. Col. William Higgins — on a helicopter just before Christmas 1991. In Syria, as ambassador from 1998 to 2001, I witnessed the coordination between Syria and Iran in support of Hezbollah and the close embrace of Hezbollah’s leader by President Bashar al-Assad. As ambassador to Iraq years later, I stood at ramp ceremonies honoring our service members killed by Shiite militias supported by General Suleimani.
So when his death was confirmed, it was a moment of quiet satisfaction for me: A formidable enemy of the United States was gone, and he will not be easily replaced. That is some vindication for the hundreds of American lives he had taken over the years. But what comes next?
The United States is engaged in something I call escalation dominance. This means we need to calculate how an adversary is likely to respond to a given action of ours. What are the United States’ vulnerabilities? What are theirs? Depending on the adversary’s reactions, what is our range of follow up moves? In short, how does the United States increase pain for the Iranians while denying them the opportunity to counter escalate?
In the complex context of Iran, this becomes multidimensional chess. We have forces in Iraq and Syria, as well as a military presence throughout the Gulf: in Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Oman. These are assets, but they are also potential targets, as are the countries where they are located. We will also have to consult very closely with Israel.
Escalation dominance is not a simple measure of raw power. It is about which party is more likely to dominate in a given context, something that is a function of abilities but also determination, prioritization and patience. I learned this the hard way in Beirut in the 1980s, when the young Islamic Republic of Iran was still able to force us out of Lebanon, even while it was engaged in a brutal war of attrition against Saddam Hussein’s Iraq.
An attempt at escalation dominance by Iran might include threats and actions against our regional allies, sustained attacks on tanker traffic in the Gulf and direct attacks on United States installations in the region. But the options for Iran and its backers are not only kinetic. Even before the Suleimani strike in Baghdad, political parties close to Iran had floated the possibility of legislation in the Iraqi parliament demanding the departure of all United States forces from the country. On Sunday, Iraqi lawmakers passed it, and the prime minister has indicated he will sign it.
While we might be in a virtual state of war with Iran, the confrontations are taking place in Iraq, which in many ways is caught in the middle. If our embassy in Baghdad is evacuated and our ability to monitor and influence events on the ground is lost, it will be a victory for Iran. Iraqis remember that the last time United States forces withdrew from their country, the Islamic State moved in.
The United States will also have military options that it did not exercise in 1983, including direct, large scale attacks on Iran. How far are we prepared to go in an escalatory spiral? I hope the administration worked through that before the Suleimani strike.
The Trump administration will have to understand the full complexity of the conflict it just escalated, assemble and utilize a large cadre of area specialists, work closely with allies and above all, commit to seeing through to an end of what already has been a very long war. These are not attributes that have characterized the Trump presidency thus far.
But for the moment, I do take satisfaction in what happened Friday on the Baghdad airport road. Over the last several years, it seems that General Suleimani allowed his ego to overcome his judgment. The shadow commander came out of the shadows, holding news conferences and conducting media tours. This time we were waiting. It was a brilliantly planned and executed strike, killing just five — including not only the general, but also Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, the leader of an Iranian-supported militia who was implicated in the 1983 bombing of our embassy in Kuwait.
General Suleimani himself might have been proud to claim credit for the operation that killed him.