Inside Telfar Clemens’s Riotous Palazzo Party
In the majestic 17th-century Palazzo Corsini, on the banks of the Arno River in Florence, Telfar Clemens was staging a takeover. The Liberian-American designer, together with a band of creative collaborators he had flown to Italy from New York, was preparing to host an all-night dinner party and a runway show inside the palace, at the invitation of the men’s wear trade show Pitti Uomo. In baroque rooms decorated with antique tapestries of the Corsini crest and an imposing stone statue of the family’s papal forefather, the team styled looks for the show, made final preparations for the banquet and sang over the microphones that would later be used for impromptu musical performances — occupying the palace with what one fellow traveler lovingly referred to as “weird, freaky New York City essence.”
“With fashion week happenings, people always think of inviting everyone except the people that actually support them,” Clemens said during a fitting on Tuesday in the palace’s yellow brocade-walled library. “We started with the idea of who we wanted here — the people we like to work with and hang out with.” Pitti Uomo had offered the designer his pick of locations around Florence, including industrial spaces that might seem more in line with the unisex, norm-defying clothing brand he founded in 2005 but, he said, “hijacking a palace where all my friends join me for a dinner and a sleepover made a lot of sense.” Nearby, his brother filmed footage for a documentary about the fashion designer, while his mother and aunt observed the fittings; surrounded by racks of clothing, Babak Radboy, the brand’s artistic director, and Avena Gallagher, its stylist and Radboy’s wife, selected runway outfits for a fleet of models and musicians. For Clemens, whose clothing and signature logo-embossed tote bag have become beloved emblems for a certain pro-black, pro-queer creative community, his friends and family have always been the foundation of his runway shows, including this one.
Indeed, the dinner party that evening was almost entirely off-limits to journalists. “This event is for us. It’s not for an audience,” explained Radboy. Ten beds, underlit by fluorescent tubes, as well as a pair of stripper poles, were set up in the smaller palace rooms — for lounging, sleeping, dancing — and guests gathered for the meal in the grand former throne hall under a ceiling painted with frescoes of angels and Roman gods. The assembled friends were all dressed in pieces from the new Telfar collection: T-shirts with theatrical scarf-tie collars, cotton button-downs made up of minute pleats, gathered velour pants with legs so wide they resembled flowing skirts. Clemens recently moved his clothing production to the Emilia Romagna region of Italy, and the months he spent in the country imbued the collection with references to the Renaissance and the Baroque era; the Italian fabrication yielded the most distinctly luxurious and artisanal clothing he has created to date.
Seated at a custom-built circular banquet table — 30 foot wide and laid with a riotous jumble of fruits, focaccia, laurel branches, roses and silver candlesticks — the 40 guests ate conceptual fare from the experimental New York-based food collective Spiral Theory Test Kitchen. As the group — which included the musicians Solange and Kelela, and the artist Juliana Huxtable — enjoyed dishes such as fried fish bones and a jellylike dish called “rain” served on a compact disc, several musicians spontaneously contributed songs using microphones that had been set up among the flowers and food. Elsewhere, gloved hands delivered bites of food from openings in a wall designed to evoke glory holes, and later in the evening a palate cleanser was served in the form of a fruit-infused ball gag. One guest gyrated atop the table as he licked a hot candle.
“We’re not interested in the traditional way that fashion brands collaborate with musicians,” said Clemens. “It’s more like we like each other’s company, and there’s creative exchange.” The up-and-coming New York musician Hawa paced the tabletop with her long braids swinging as she ad-libbed a song; the London-based D.J., model and musician Carrie Stacks crooned at a keyboard in the table’s center; the performance artist Boychild danced in interpretive shivers and the free jazz band Standing on the Corner improvised on classical instruments. They would all perform again during the runway show the next day, when the table would become a catwalk and the outside world would finally be allowed to see what Clemens had been up to. That following evening, models strutted over the dinner’s detritus — wine stains, bread crumbs and wilted roses under their logo-emblazoned loafers — in a performance that, like Judy Chicago’s feminist “Dinner Party” installation of the 1970s, made a monument out of a banquet and, in Radboy’s words, created “space for people who never used to get space in the world.”
“There are real signs of the artisanal world in this collection,” said Clemens during a fitting in the Palazzo Corsini library. After recently moving his clothing production to Italy, he became fascinated by the intricacy and flair of the Renaissance and Baroque clothing he glimpsed in old Italian portraits.
During the fitting, Clemens (seated at left) worked with Radboy (at the board) and Gallagher to select and style outfits for the models. Clemens’s brother Omar, visible in the mirror, was on hand to shoot footage for a documentary about the designer.
Gallagher selected a pair of Telfar’s signature cut-out jeans for Bobbi Salvör Menuez, one of the show’s models and a co-founder of Spiral Theory Test Kitchen, the cooking collective that prepared the evening’s dinner.
As models arrived and fittings for the runway show continued under Clemens’s direction, a hairstylist plaited slender rows of braids in his hair.
The influence of Italy was seen everywhere in the collection, from the logo-embossed rosary bead necklaces to the Renaissance-style neck flounce of the Telfar blouse Clemens wore to his dinner party.
Before the dinner, guests were asked to abandon their own clothes on racks arranged in the palace’s former ballroom and to style themselves in outfits from the new Telfar collection. Only Solange, whose plane was delayed, missed the outfit change, but she made do with a Telfar top of her own that she’d packed in her suitcase.
Among the party’s decorations were a real boar’s head, in honor of the Tuscan setting, and a bathtub, from which a woman in a headscarf delicately poured cold water infused with citrus peels and flower petals over guests’ hands. Spiral Theory Test Kitchen filled the tabletop with an array of branches, flowers, fruits and nuts as well as more startling elements such as a fountain of blood and a giant, marrow-filled split bone.
Many of Clemens’s musical friends flew to Florence to take part in the event, including Solange, Kelela and Juliana Huxtable. Guests sang and played in the table’s central orchestra pit, or used the table as an impromptu stage.
Friends including Michèle Lamy (pictured at left), the creative polymath and wife of designer Rick Owens, joined the party after dinner, when revelers moved from the throne hall to dance and lounge in the palace’s more intimate rooms. In the small ballroom, Solange (pictured at right) chatted with Clemens and Gio Escobar, whose experimental jazz band Standing on the Corner performed that night and at the runway show the following day.
“A lot of the kids we have, I don’t think another model could replace them,” Clemens said of his casting during a walk-through for the runway show. Most his models have been with him for many seasons, and were flown to Florence from New York for the event. “They have their own style, and they bring that to our clothes,” he said.
Clemens and Gallagher watched the final run-through before the show with Malcolm, Gallagher and Radboy’s 5-year-old son. Malcolm was a fixture in the backstage areas throughout the event; he played with the adults on Telfar’s team and, during the party, took to the mic alongside the musical guests.
The runway collection continued Telfar’s deconstruction and reconstruction of wardrobe staples in the pursuit of a wilder new version of basics. “We accelerated into another place of what denim could be,” Clemens said of his jeans, which came in a wide range of silhouettes. He described the styles as “’70s, ’80s, ’90s, 2000s — everything that’s ever been possible with denim all at once.”
Unusual fabric combinations abounded in the collection; Clemens spliced a wool pea coat with puffer padding, a cotton T-shirt with nylon sleeves, and mixed thick cable knits with leather in pants and bombers. Some of the models wore statement-making hairpieces to embolden the look, others wore what Clemens called “Renaissance curls, but for black people.”
Clemens danced onto the table to take his bow after the last model walked — triumphant, relieved, and ready for a marathon second party that night that he would host together with the designer Stefano Pilati. As Clemens left the stage, Hawa closed the presentation with a crowd-rousing serenade.
Following days of intense preparations, late nights and little sleep, the team shared hugs, whoops, and even some tears after the runway show wrapped. It was a memorable success, both for Clemens and for everyone who got to see his creative vision play out on such a spectacular stage.