Trump Hurts an Ally and Helps the Terrorists
Americans will debate the American drone strike that killed the Iranian commander Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani for a long time: whether it was wise, what it means for the Middle East, and how to proceed. But so far, the most dramatic consequences have arisen from where the strike happened — in Iraq. It appears that in undertaking the strike, the Trump administration may have sacrificed a valuable American counterterrorism partnership with Iraq at the altar of a risky pressure campaign against Iran with no end in sight.
On Sunday, Iraq’s Parliament took a nonbinding vote urging Iraq’s government to expel American forces from the country. The strike — on Iraqi soil, killing Iraqi officials, without Iraqi consent — appears to have united the two largest rival Shiite parliamentary blocs behind expulsion. Since 2014, American troops have been in the country as invited guests of the Iraqi government to fight the Islamic State and train the Iraqi military. Iraqis deemed a shooting war with Iran and its Iraqi allies as a far cry from that mission.
Iraqi politics sometimes goes to the precipice only to pull back. That could still happen here, especially given that Kurdish and Sunni leaders boycotted the vote. But it is difficult to see how American forces can stay to conduct their mission if the Iraqi Parliament, as well as inflamed Iraqi militias, now wish them gone. Iraqi political factions have previously tried to expel American forces only to fall short. But this time is different. After popular protests against corruption, Iraq’s political leadership is the weakest it has been in 15 years. So are the ties between American and Iraqi leaders.
Assuming these votes do indeed mean that America’s days in Iraq are numbered, that is bad for Iraq and America, a major opportunity for the Islamic State, and also a big victory for Iran. General Suleimani would have been pleased to see American forces pushed out of a country that shares a 900-mile border with Iran, where American troops represented one of the major counterweights to Tehran’s domination.
Yet leaving Iraq would be a logical outgrowth of Mr. Trump’s policies to date. Until recently, he has treated Iraq as either an afterthought or a disappointing appendage to his “maximum pressure” strategy against Iran. Despite its disastrous invasion and occupation, America has achieved both meaningful influence in Iraq and real joint successes in fighting jihadists with a combination of military and civilian engagement. Mr. Trump seemed to understand the military half of this equation. Had he set out to undermine the civilian side of the formula, he could scarcely have done better.
In his first week in office, the “Muslim ban” barred Iraqis from American soil even as they battled the Islamic State alongside American troops. Mr. Trump spoke early and often about wanting to “take the oil” from Iraq, and then said America was only there to “watch Iran.” In December 2018, he visited American troops in Iraq without meeting a single Iraqi leader — indeed, he still hasn’t met Iraq’s prime minister. There remains no senior point person for Iraq in the Trump administration. The administration also dangerously neglected reconstruction in the areas liberated from the Islamic State.
Even as tensions between the United States and Iran spiked after Mr. Trump walked away from the Iran nuclear deal, his administration withdrew American diplomats from southern Iraq and evacuated nonessential civilian staff from Baghdad. This means military reinforcements are arriving to protect a diplomatic skeleton crew navigating a political crisis in Iraq’s capital.
More American diplomats in Iraq would certainly be helpful right now: The United States should be urgently working with its remaining security and political partners, including Kurdish and Sunni leaders whose parliamentary blocs boycotted the vote, to see if it is possible to stave off complete expulsion or at least set the terms for an orderly departure. Americans’ safety remains paramount and under threat. Securely removing all Americans, advanced weaponry, sensitive intelligence, and other infrastructure would be a dizzying logistical challenge, as it was in 2011 over a long timeline in a relatively permissive environment. Should American forces be permitted to stay, operating safely and effectively will be immensely challenging. So will rebuilding Iraqi good will.
It did not have to be this way. A more successful policy would have treated Iraq not simply as a battleground with Iran but as an important if flawed partner whose stability is in America’s self-interest. Iraq remains ground zero for fighting the Islamic State, which only a few years ago menaced the entire region as the world’s most dangerous terrorist organization. There are already signs of resurgence. That becomes more likely should the Defense Department and intelligence agencies lose their counterterrorism footprint inside Iraq.
Some may argue that by leaving, the United States will make Iraq and the jihadists there into Iran’s problem. But that ignores recent history, including the global chaos wreaked by the Islamic State just five years ago after American troops had left. Others suggest that, should the Islamic State re-emerge to threaten the world, America would be invited back. That is a risky bet given the nature of America’s departure.
Iraq is not only a counterterrorism theater and flash point for outside powers. It is also a country of nearly 40 million still recovering from civil war. It matters to America that the risk of relapse is real, but so are Iraqis’ chances to demonstrate that different sects and ethnicities can still live together in today’s Middle East. A wiser American approach in Iraq would have invested in Iraqi nationalists — seeing not just counterterrorism, Iranian infiltration, and oil, but the concerns of a young population that braved militia bullets to demand reforms to corrupt, broken politics. Mr. Trump has made clear his priorities lie elsewhere.