Free Shakespeare in the Park: ‘Richard II’ and ‘As You Like It’
The Public Theater announced on Thursday that it will bring a new production of “Richard II” and a version of its 2017 musical adaptation of “As You Like It” to the Delacorte Theater in Central Park this summer for its free Shakespeare in the Park series.
“There is no issue in the world that can’t be helped by a little Shakespeare,” the theater’s artistic director, Oskar Eustis, said in a statement. “This summer, ‘Richard II’ explores the extraordinary danger and possibility of regime change and ‘As You Like It’ celebrates a Forest of Arden where all refugees are welcome.”
Saheem Ali, who helmed the recent Signature Theater revival of Anna Deavere Smith’s “Fires in the Mirror,” will direct “Richard II.” The play was last staged at the Delacorte in 1987, when the founder of the theater program, Joseph Papp, directed Peter MacNicol in the title role. Having it return during an election year that began with an impeachment trial is a pointed choice: “Richard II” tells a story about political rebellion and abdication. The play will run May 19 through June 21. Casting has not yet been announced.
In the second half of the season, the Public will present the reimagined 2017 adaptation of “As You Like It,” which was a product of the theater’s Public Works program. Directed by Laurie Woolery with original music by the composer Shaina Taub and choreography by Sonya Tayeh, the adaptation placed more than 200 amateur performers alongside professional actors. (Alexis Soloski called the result “thrilling” in her review for The New York Times.) The adaptation ran for only a handful of days that year. This summer, it returns with Taub, Darius de Haas and Joel Perez reprising lead roles — and it will have a new set, among other changes. “As You Like It” will run July 14 through Aug. 8.
The shows will be free, and tickets will be available in person and by digital lottery. More information is available at publictheater.org.