Brokers’ Fees Ban: Renters Are Jubilant, but Agents Are Reeling
John Grant was ready to live alone in New York City for the first time. He searched for weeks until he found an apartment in Astoria, Queens, that met his needs.
On Wednesday, Mr. Grant, 29, turned in an application requiring him to pay $2,700, or 12 percent of his annual lease, to the broker who handled the listing. He wasn’t thrilled but saw the fee as an unavoidable outlay for landing his ideal home, which he had found on StreetEasy, a listings website.
Then, that evening, he learned that New York State regulators had ruled this week that renters could no longer be charged brokers’ fees, leaving the question of his payment, which he has not yet made, uncertain.
“I don’t want to have to pay a broker’s fee if it’s illegal,” he said.
Renters, brokers and landlords alike were left scrambling to interpret the guidance unexpectedly issued late Tuesday night that, under landmark tenant protection laws passed last summer, brokers could no longer require tenants to pay them fees.
Under the state guidance, brokers representing property owners would still be able to collect fees — but from the landlord, not the tenant. Sometimes renters hire a broker themselves to help them find an apartment; those brokers would still be allowed to charge tenants a fee.
But it is common for prospective tenants to find apartments through online listing sites, like StreetEasy and Craigslist, or through word of mouth rather than by contacting individual landlords or brokerages.
The changes could have dire, and still unknowable, reverberations for New York City’s 25,000 licensed real estate brokers, whose livelihoods depend on the fees.
“It’s a major reversal in fortune,” said Maurice Grey, who runs Esra Realty, a small firm in Harlem originally founded by his grandmother and her sisters. He worried the regulation would be disastrous for his family’s business.
“I’m a third-generation real estate broker in Harlem,” Mr. Grey, 45, said. “But ask me if my kids will be the fourth generation? I don’t think so.”
In New York City’s sprawling and competitive rental market, brokers have long handled apartment listings, viewing appointments, applications and leases for landlords.
For their services, brokers have collected fees from tenants that can be as high as 15 percent of the annual lease, usually paid up front before a renter can move in.
That arrangement, which prevails in a few large cities across the United States, may now be upended.
Many brokers, caught off guard by the surprise announcement, appeared to continue operating business as usual on Thursday, arguing that the state’s guidance was an interpretation of the law, not an enforceable mandate.
In an email to his staff, Gary Malin, the chief operating officer of Corcoran, one of the largest brokerage firms in New York, urged brokers “to push back on this harmful and haphazard interpretation of the Tenant Protection Act.”
“In the meantime, remember that this interpretation merely represents the opinion of the DOS,” he wrote, referring to New York’s Department of State. “Until further notice, we recommend continuing to conduct your business in accordance with the law and all applicable regulations, not advisory opinions promulgated in haste.”
Many renters who had signed leases after the passage of the rent laws in mid-June said they were confused whether they could have their fees refunded.
On Thursday, the Department of State said the changes only applied to future rentals.
“This is not intended to apply retroactively, and future transactions should be entered into with this guidance in mind,” Erin McCarthy, a spokeswoman for the department, said in a statement.
Gabriella Yacyk, 29, said she paid a broker’s fee, about $2,800, for an apartment in Park Slope just four days before the state released its guidance.
“I am so happy that there are going to be no more brokers’ fees,” she said. “This is just really bad timing personally, so it’s a bummer.”
James Whelan, the president of the Real Estate Board of New York, a powerful industry group, called the guidance “misguided and harmful” and called on the state to rescind its memo.
“All stakeholders should have an opportunity to discuss the ramifications on agents, owners and renters alike,” he said in a statement. “We are exploring every avenue, including pursuing prompt legal action.”
Still, the organization has recommended that its members abide by the new guidance.
Since brokers would still be able to collect fees from landlords, experts said landlords would in many cases probably pass on those costs to tenants by increasing the monthly rent.
Tenants would avoid paying a large, one-time broker’s fee, but, over time, they could end up paying more: Instead of just paying when they move in, tenants could face paying a higher rent with the broker’s fee baked in even after a tenant renews a lease.
But though owners of market-rate units might be able to pass on the cost to tenants, landlords of the city’s nearly 1 million rent-stabilized apartments would not. Those rents are strictly regulated by the government.
The real estate industry warned that many brokers could lose their jobs or stand to make less money.
Jed Wilder, a real estate broker at Compass, said that when brokers collect fees from a landlord, not the tenant — an atypical arrangement in New York — the fees are usually no more than one month’s rent. Tenants typically pay more, between 10 and 15 percent of the annual rent.
Sarah Saltzberg, a broker who runs Bohemia Realty, a brokerage firm based in Harlem, said the public has a misconception about brokers.
Her rental agents, she said, typically make $45,000 to $60,000 a year.
“These are hard-working New Yorkers that are quite frankly able to stay in this city because they have this job,” she said. “The agents are out there, pounding the pavement, going up and down stairs, looking at apartments that may not have been treated for bed bugs, doing some really hard work.”
She added, “It’s the equivalent of having the rug pulled out from underneath us.”
Tenants were required to pay a broker’s fee for about 45 percent of rentals listed on StreetEasy in 2019, according to the company.
Raphael Mandelbaum, who owns five buildings with about 300 rent-stabilized units in the Bronx and the Inwood neighborhood in Manhattan, said he was caught by surprise and would convene his staff to figure out what to do.
Mr. Mandelbaum said he can’t raise rents significantly because of government-imposed limits, and he cannot afford to pay the brokers, so now he may have to show the apartments himself, as he did when he got into the business in 2010.
“It was difficult, it was time-consuming, it was hard to attract the tenants that I would have preferred in the building,” he said. “It was kind of like sitting back and seeing who shows up instead of just giving them to a broker to market.”
Renters in New York City have often been baffled and irritated about having to pay brokers’ fees, even when they found apartments listed online and did not use brokers in their search.
The payment also came on top of a security deposit, first month’s rent and, in some cases, application fees, requiring prospective tenants to foot a major lump sum payment to move into a new apartment.
The rent laws passed last year limited security deposits to one month’s rent and also limited application fees to $20.
Alex Cope, 22, who moved to New York from Vermont, said finding his first apartment in the city had been a rude awakening.
“The less money I have to pay the better,” he said. “It takes a huge weight off my shoulders.”
Mr. Grant, the teacher in Astoria, has called a lawyer seeking clarification on the new rule so he can determine whether he was still on the hook for the fee, which he said was close to a month of his take-home pay.
He was supposed to pay his broker’s fee on Thursday, but his broker rescheduled their appointment for Monday.
Mr. Grant hoped that the next few days would bring some clarity to the situation. But ultimately, he said, if he were told that he had to honor his agreement and pay the fee to get his apartment, he would pony up.
“My goal is to get this apartment,” he said. “And I was prepared for it.”