‘Very Male, Very White’: Let’s Talk About Those Oscar Nominations
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
If, as an awards show, you were looking to start a controversy, you might start by nominating only male directors for the second year in a row, while also taking special care to pass over every actor of color except the one who played Harriet Tubman.
Behold, this year’s Oscars: On Monday, The Times reported, “the 9,000-member Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences largely maintained its traditional point of view, handing out the most nominations to four very male, very white movies,” excluding what The Times’s awards season columnist Kyle Buchanan called “some of the most exciting performances and films of the season.”
Naturally, the list drew considerable criticism, but also some limited praise. Here’s what movie critics are saying.
Six of the nine movies nominated for best picture are almost entirely about white men, but there’s an upside to that, writes The Washington Post’s Alyssa Rosenberg. Yes, it’s a shame that the voters’ preferences are so narrow. (Four years into its diversification effort, the academy remains 68 percent male and 84 percent white.) But this year’s selections at least offer welcome attempts at “sorting masculinity out,” as she puts it, which, under patriarchy, is “an important thing to do if we want to make everyone else safer.”
Not all of the films nominated do so in ways that are artistically satisfying, she argues. While “The Joker” ran away with the most nominations, “1917,” “Ford v Ferrari” and “The Irishman” are far more interesting, partly because they are “about men trying, and in some cases failing, to be good.”
It would be nice if the academy showed the same interest in the inner lives of women and people of color, Ms. Rosenberg writes. But until then, “the academy could do worse than to nominate movies that at least show some skepticism about men, instead of taking their heroism and morality for granted.”
[Related: What Is a White Man Mad About in This Oscar-Nominated Movie?]
It’s easy, and dangerous, to overnarrativize the Oscar nominations, writes Mark Harris in Vanity Fair. This year’s nominations are no more dispositive of some cultural defeat than the 2017 Oscar season, during which seven actors of color were nominated, was dispositive of victory.
“Setbacks certainly give comfort to reactionary elements that exist quietly within the academy and more loudly outside of it — people who want any excuse to argue what they’ve been arguing for years and years on many fronts, which is that diversity efforts constitute both special pleading and an exercise in futility. They are, of course, neither,” he writes.
And there are some bright spots: Martin Scorsese’s “The Irishman” — “a masterpiece,” in Mr. Harris’s view — received 10 nominations, and Bong Joon-ho’s “Parasite” became the first South Korean film to get nominations for best director and best picture. “All he had to do was make the year’s best movie,” Mr. Harris tweeted.
The Oscar nominations should be thrown into the fireplace for the academy’s refusal to recognize female directors, writes Dana Stevens, Slate’s movie critic. This year saw an abundance of critically acclaimed movies directed by women, including Lulu Wang’s “The Farewell,” Greta Gerwig’s “Little Women,” Mati Diop’s “The Atlantics,” Céline Sciamma’s “Portrait of a Lady on Fire,” Lorene Scafaria’s “Hustlers” and Chinonye Chukwu’s “Clemency.”
“To respond to a year like that with the studious exclusion of any one female from the award that above all others confers authorship and authority, the one that attributes a film’s success to the unifying vision of an individual, starts to look like nothing else but rank condescending sexism,” Ms. Stevens writes.
“It’s inexcusable, disheartening, and thoroughly embarrassing,” writes Laura Bradley at Vanity Fair. “Only one woman, Kathryn Bigelow, has ever won best director — and that was now a decade ago.”
Ms. Gerwig’s omission is “scandalous,” writes Richard Brody at The New Yorker. “I don’t think that her direction of the movie is literally among the year’s five best achievements in the field,” he writes, “but it’s pretty close, and it’s far superior to that of all the nominees except Scorsese.”
Alexandra Schwartz, also at The New Yorker, tweeted:
Where are all the actors of color? asks Yohana Desta at Vanity Fair. Nineteen out of 20 actors nominated are white, the lone exception being Cynthia Erivo for Kasi Lemmons’s “Harriet.” Conspicuously absent were Jennifer Lopez, the entire cast of “Parasite” and Awkwafina, whose performance in “The Farewell” won a Golden Globe.
“The surprise is not the lack of diversity itself,” Ms. Desta writes. “Rather, it’s the academy’s sheer audacity to opt for a nearly all-white slate (again!), despite the fact that nearly a dozen actors of color have been a serious part of this year’s awards-season conversation.”
The academy’s choice not to nominate Ms. Lopez for “Hustlers” dispels the “illusion of inclusion in relation to Latinx people” that has recently permeated Hollywood, Carlos Aguilar writes in The Times. (In his review of “Hustlers,” A.O. Scott, The Times’s chief film critic, called Ms. Lopez’s performance a “finely calibrated,” “incandescent one-woman spectacle” that in some ways outshone the movie.)
But even more dispiriting than Ms. Lopez’s snub itself, Mr. Aguilar writes, are its implications for Latinx representation in the industry more broadly.
The few Latin American actresses who have been shortlisted in recent memory played characters exhibiting “familiar tropes,” he adds. “What’s noteworthy about Ms. Lopez’s turn is that it does not abide by preconceived and clichéd expectations of who a Latinx woman is, specifically one born and raised in the United States,” he writes. “What does it mean that this type of Latinx character — not a maid, not a drug mule, not a nanny — wasn’t acknowledged by the academy?”
A version of that question has also been asked about Lupita Nyong’o, who won for best supporting actress in 2014 for her portrayal of Patsey in “12 Years a Slave,” but whose mirrored performance in Jordan Peele’s “Us” (“dazzling,” according to The Times; “virtuosic,” according to The New Yorker) went unrecognized this year.
“It legitimizes this idea that black stories must revolve around sorrow and loss in order to be seen as important,” says Angelica Jade Bastién at Vulture, who called Ms. Erivo’s “Harriet” performance “stunningly forgettable.”
Cassie da Costa, an entertainment writer for The Daily Beast, tweeted:
Do you have thoughts about the Oscars or work that went unrecognized? Email us at debatable@nytimes.com. Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
“Why Did the Oscars Ignore Jennifer Lopez in ‘Hustlers’?” [The New York Times]
"Greta Gerwig Isn’t as Outraged as Twitter About Her Directing Snub” [The New York Times]
“Bong Joon-ho’s Dystopia Is Already Here” [Vulture]
“The Oscars and the Illusion of Perfect Representation” [The New York Times]
“The 2020 Oscar nominations didn’t have to look like this” [The Washington Post]
Here’s what readers had to say about the last debate: Did Trump do the right thing with Iran?
Sandra from Oregon: “As is his wont, Trump creates a crisis, then stops creating it and takes credit for ‘fixing’ it. It would be entirely yawn-worthy but for the 176 people, 57 of them Canadians, on that commercial passenger airplane in Tehran.”
Chris from Massachusetts (via email): “Suleimani was a player that deserved the end he got. Those who live by the sword shall die by the sword. What is unfortunate is that the United States tore up the nuclear treaty with Iran initially."