Judge Halts Trump Policy That Allows States to Bar Refugees
A federal judge on Wednesday temporarily suspended a new Trump administration policy that allowed state and local authorities to opt out of receiving refugees, concluding that the policy would likely be found to be illegal.
The preliminary injunction issued by Judge Peter J. Messitte of the United States District Court in Maryland blocks an executive order from September that empowered governors and county and city officials to effectively reject refugees fleeing persecution around the world.
President Trump’s order forced the issue of refugee resettlement to the political forefront in communities from North Dakota to Massachusetts, where heated debate has flared over whether to continue receiving vulnerable people from Africa, Asia and the Middle East who have often endured violence and years-long displacement.
Last week, Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas became the first governor to veto the resettlement of refugees in his state. Several mayors in Texas, including those in Houston, Dallas and Austin, expressed their support for taking in refugees.
In his 31-page opinion, the judge said the executive order undermines the role of resettlement agencies by leaving the decision to receive refugees solely in the hands of states and localities.
“If they do not consent — apparently for any reason or for no reason — there will be no resettlement in that entire state or in that local community,” the judge said in his ruling. “Resettlement agencies will be totally sidelined. In other words, as the screens in e-sports inevitably register: ‘Game Over.’”
The judge also said the order appears to run counter to the Refugee Act’s stated purpose “to provide comprehensive and uniform provisions for effective resettlement and absorption of those refugees who are admitted.”
“It is hard to see how the order, if implemented, would not subvert the delicate federal-state structuring contemplated by the Refugee Act,” the judge said.
Since the resettlement program began 40 years ago, refugees have most often been sent to localities where they have family, where there is an existing community from their home countries or where they are likely to find jobs and affordable housing.
Before being allowed into the United States, refugees undergo extensive vetting, including security checks, that can take years to complete. Once in the country, they become eligible for legal permanent residency and later can apply for citizenship.
The injunction followed a legal challenge to the executive order in November by three nonprofit organizations that are among faith-based agencies contracted by the government to resettle refugees. They argued that the presidential order was a violation of the Refugee Act and unconstitutional because the federal government, not states and localities, has authority over immigration policy.
Judge Messitte concluded that the plaintiffs, Lutheran Immigrant and Refugee Service, Church World Service and the Jewish refugee resettlement group HIAS, were likely to succeed in their lawsuit. As a result of his ruling, states and localities are temporarily relieved of the requirement to give explicit consent to continue receiving refugees.
“We’re grateful to Judge Messitte for upholding the rule of law and ensuring that the United States remains a place of welcome for the world’s most vulnerable,” said Krish O’Mara Vignarajah, president of Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service.
But the Trump administration was critical of the ruling, saying that many communities do not have the resources to support large numbers of refugees and deserve to have a voice in determining whether more of them must be accommodated.
“Another lawless district court has asserted its own preferred immigration policy in place of the laws of the United States — and, in so doing, robbed millions of American citizens of their voice and their say in a vital issue directly affecting their communities,” the White House press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, said in a statement.
She called the injunction “a preposterous ruling, one more example of nationwide district court injunctions run amok.”
Thus far, 42 governors — 19 Republicans and 23 Democrats — and some 100 localities had consented to receive refugees. Seven states had not yet agreed: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Mississippi, South Carolina and Wyoming.
The executive order had created the potential for conflict between states and local officials over whether to accept or reject refugees.
In Texas, Lina Hidalgo, the top executive for Harris County, the largest county in the state and home to Houston, had opposed Governor Abbott’s veto and hailed the judge’s ruling.
“Our region, a top destination for refugees in the world, is proof that welcoming refugees contributes to economic success and strong, safe communities,” she said. “Opening our doors to those who are most in need should transcend partisan politics.”
On Monday, the government asked the Supreme Court to lift an injunction on another immigration policy, the so-called public charge rule, which would disqualify certain applicants from permanent residency if they had used public benefits.
Judges from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit last week upheld a nationwide injunction blocking implementation of the policy that had been issued by a federal judge in New York. Courts in three states had issued injunctions against the rule.
Since taking office, Mr. Trump has drastically reduced the number of refugees that the United States is willing to admit, to 18,000 for the current fiscal year — the smallest number since the refugee program’s inception in 1980.
In the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, the administration set a cap of 30,000 refugees, down from 45,000 the previous year. President Barack Obama had set the limit at 110,000 during his last year in office.
In the current case before the court in Maryland, lawyers for the Justice Department argued that because the president has authority to determine how many refugees are admitted each year, he also has the power to decree that state and local governments can determine whether refugees should be sent to their communities.
The government also contended that state and local governments should have the final say on whether to accept refugees because they are in the best position to judge whether they have the resources to expend on accommodating the newcomers.
But in a hearing last week, Judge Messitte, an appointee of President Bill Clinton, countered that the executive order had effectively given states veto power over refugee resettlement when they “don’t have the authority to make these kinds of decisions.”
The judge also questioned whether the executive order was politically motivated.
In his ruling on Wednesday, Judge Messitte wrote that the president’s order “flies in the face of clear Congressional intent, as expressed in the legislative history of the statute.”
The resettlement agencies said the executive order if implemented would deprive thousands of refugees of their best chance to successfully build a new life in the United States and burden thousands of families waiting to reunite with parents, children and other relatives seeking safe haven.
The State Department, which oversees the refugee program, had set a Jan. 21 deadline for states and local authorities to decide whether they would accept refugees. As of June, under plans for implementing the order, refugees would be sent only to places where officials had provided prior written consent.
Mark Hetfield, president of HIAS, the Jewish refugee resettlement agency, noted that a majority of governors and municipalities had already expressed a desire to continue welcoming refugees. “To those few who have not,” he said, “we say not only is it unkind and un-American to ban refugees from your states and towns, but it is unlawful.”