Your Thursday Briefing
The authorities in China are taking an unsubtle approach to containing the pneumonia-like virus that originated in the city of Wuhan: essentially shutting the place down.
Wuhan, population 11 million, is a hub for industry, commerce and transport in central China. But as of today, flights and trains out of the city are canceled, and bus, subway and ferry services within it are suspended.
The restrictions, which don’t yet have an end date, are intended to stop an outbreak of a mysterious coronavirus that emerged in late December, killing at least 17 people in China so far and sickening hundreds there and elsewhere. Many fear a repeat of the SARS epidemic 17 years ago, which began in China and killed more than 800 people worldwide.
Today: We have a live briefing on the latest developments.
Visual: Here’s a map of where the virus has spread.
Related: Li Yuan, our New New World columnist, has a mixed view of China’s initial response to the virus.
What’s next: The weeklong Lunar New Year holiday starts on Friday, and epidemiologists warn that mass travel across China over the next few days could make it harder to contain the outbreak.
Italy’s political system faces another potential U-turn: The leader of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement has resigned, raising the prospect that the hard-right politician Matteo Salvini could begin making a comeback, starting with regional elections this weekend.
The Five Star leader who quit on Wednesday, Luigi Di Maio, became the face of a party in disarray that has faced months of plummeting poll numbers, defections and infighting.
Background: Mr. Salvini’s anti-migrant League party was pushed out of power over the summer by Five Star, a one-time ally that later formed a coalition with the center-left Democratic Party. Victories for the League on Sunday would make the collapse of the governing coalition more probable, and potentially bring on national elections well before they are due, in 2023.
Catch up: Analysts say Five Star’s standing fell because it failed to evolve from an angry protest movement into an effective governing party.
Looking ahead: Polls suggest that the League will win Sunday’s elections in the northern region of Emilia-Romagna, which has long been synonymous with the Italian left, and in Calabria in the country’s south, which the League once denigrated as a leech on the resources of the more prosperous north.
A bill that paves the way for Britain’s departure from the European Union next week could become law today. The next step would be at the European Parliament, where the withdrawal agreement is expected to pass with ease.
The bill’s smooth ride marks a departure from the yearslong Brexit drama and acrimony that gripped British politics before Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s landslide election victory last month.
What’s next: British and E.U. representatives are preparing to negotiate a comprehensive trade deal. Mr. Johnson wants a deal by the end of 2020, but the E.U. says that’s unrealistic.
Northern Ireland: The restoration of a coalition government has prompted relief, but the region’s leadership faces an uphill struggle to save declining health and education services.
President Trump’s impeachment trial is keeping some of his top Democratic rivals for the presidency glued to their chairs in the Senate chamber — at the exact moment they’d prefer to be out campaigning.
The six-day-a-week trial, in which House Democrats began making their case against the president on Wednesday, may last for weeks. That could put Senators Bernie Sanders, Amy Klobuchar and Elizabeth Warren at a competitive disadvantage in the 2020 election’s early nominating contests.
The upshot? Two candidates who aren’t senators, Joe Biden and Pete Buttigieg, have carte blanche to campaign hard in Iowa ahead of its first-in-the-nation caucuses on Feb. 3.
Related: We asked 81 Americans from nearly 30 states what they thought about impeachment. Here’s what they said.
Go deeper: Mr. Sanders is attacking Mr. Biden and trying to downplay a spat with Ms. Warren, just as Hillary Clinton attacks him and his poll numbers rise in Iowa. (Long story.)
When the Moroccan immigrants Ali and Amar Sitayeb, above, opened a convenience mart in Paris’s historic Jewish quarter, the neighborhood still had plenty of textile and metal factories.
That was 1984. Today, their store in the Marais is just one of many independent shops being swept away by a wave of moneyed gentrification in Paris and other French cities. It’s soon to be replaced by a lingerie outlet run by a Japanese retail giant.
“How is a bra going to replace my orange juice?” asked a retiree who has lived next to the shop for two decades.
Digital tax truce: French and American officials seemed to strike a truce on Wednesday in a spat over France’s plan to impose a 3 percent tax on the revenues that technology companies earn from providing digital services.
Jeff Bezos hacking: The Amazon chief’s iPhone was apparently compromised when he received a video from a WhatsApp account belonging to Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, according to a forensic analysis. The Saudi Embassy in Washington denied that the kingdom was involved.
Royals vs. tabloids: In the latest skirmish over privacy between the British royal family and the country’s press, lawyers representing Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, threatened some British publications with legal action after they published pictures of her walking with her son in a Canadian public park.
Child prodigy: A 3-year-old has been invited to join Mensa, a British society whose membership rules require an I.Q. in the top 2 percent of the population.
Snapshot: Iliana Regan, above, created a Michelin-starred restaurant in Chicago and published a celebrated food memoir last summer. Now she and her wife have turned a four-bedroom log cabin into an inn, and she’s trying to redefine what it means to be an American chef.
In memoriam: Terry Jones, a director, screenwriter and (most famously) member of the British comedy troupe Monty Python, died on Tuesday in London. He was 77.
What we’re reading: This explainer on a different measure of deliciousness, from Taiwan Business Topics: “Today’s lesson,” writes our food correspondent Kim Severson, “is understanding the Q factor in Taiwanese food. It’s good-chewy.”
Cook: If tres leches cake is not enough, add three more milks.
Watch: “Before Sunrise” was released 25 years ago. The stars and creators shared  how they made movie magic out of a tiny budget and capricious Viennese trains.
Listen: Yola, an English singer and songwriter, talked about her “genre-fluid” country-soul music, which has received four Grammy Award nominations.
Smarter Living: Here’s how to tip hotel workers when you travel.
Javier C. Hernández, a correspondent in our Beijing bureau, is reporting this week from the Chinese city of Wuhan, the epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak. Mike spoke with Javier via Slack, a messaging service.
Hi, Javier. What’s the mood in Wuhan right now?
Walking the streets, you definitely feel a sense of urgency is spreading. Lots of people are now wearing masks and avoiding big crowds. All of this is happening in the midst of the Lunar New Year holiday, so it has forced many families to rethink their plans. People are canceling dinners, staying home from work and hunkering down.
It must be hard to avoid big crowds in a city of 11 million people.
Yes, it’s almost impossible to avoid crowds in a modern Chinese city. But Wuhan is trying to push people to take more precautions. When you get in a cab now, there are reminders about opening the window and wearing a mask. Some of the famous street markets are now totally empty, surrounded by signs warning about the virus.
Are you hearing any common sentiments in your interviews?
Several people told me about their memories of the SARS crisis of 2003, which killed hundreds of people in China. They’re worried this could erupt into a full-blown epidemic. Of course, others say they’re not very concerned and have faith that China can beat this. One common theme is people say they want the Chinese government to speak honestly about the severity of the outbreak — something that didn’t happen during SARS.
Are you taking any specific precautions, like wearing a mask?
Yes, at the advice of experts, my colleague Elsie Chen and I are washing our hands regularly and avoiding meat markets and hospital wards. We are wearing masks all the time. It’s a bit odd having that kind of barrier when you’re interviewing people on the street. But we’ve found that it is quickly becoming the norm in Wuhan. There are even videos now circulating of people giving New Year’s toasts with their masks on!