Romance Writers of America Leadership Resigns
The Romance Writers of America, grappling with the backlash to a racism dispute that has spurred furious debate over diversity and inclusion issues within the romance genre, said Thursday that its president and executive director have resigned.
In a statement, the trade organization, which has more than 9,000 members, called the events of the past few weeks “the most painful and tumultuous” of its history. Damon Suede, its president, has stepped down, “effective immediately,” and Carol Ritter, its executive director, has also resigned, though she will remain in the position for the coming months to assist with the leadership transition.
The R.W.A. said it would not immediately name a new president, instead “working transparently with its membership” to develop a process for appointing Mr. Suede’s successor. It didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.
Writers, agents and others in romance publishing — a lucrative segment of the overall publishing industry with a deeply engaged base of readers — have called for Mr. Suede and Ms. Ritter’s resignations since late last year, when the organization came under scrutiny for its handling of an ethics complaint against Courtney Milan, a writer and former R.W.A. board member.
Ms. Milan, who is Chinese-American, had criticized “Somewhere Lies the Moon,” a book set in China in the 1800s, as a “racist mess,” prompting its author, Kathryn Lynn Davis, and her employer, Suzan Tisdale, to file ethics complaints against Ms. Milan. The R.W.A.’s punishment — suspending Ms. Milan and barring her from holding leadership positions — was widely criticized by other R.W.A. members and romance writers. It also prompted wider debate over how the romance genre handles issues of race, diversity and inclusion.
The departures were the latest developments in a head-spinning week for the organization. On Wednesday, several major romance publishers, including Harlequin and Avon, said they wouldn’t attend or sponsor the R.W.A.’s annual conference this year, citing concerns with R.W.A.’s commitment to diversity. Earlier in the week the R.W.A. canceled its awards program, the Ritas, after contestants and judges dropped out.
“We are committed to supporting our authors, however, we cannot support R.W.A. or the national conference until you are fulfilling your mission to your members,” said the president and chief executive of Kensington Publishing, Steven Zacharius, in a statement.
Mr. Suede’s resignation “is a good first step,” HelenKay Dimon, a former R.W.A. president, said in an email. “With that barrier removed, R.W.A. can sit a full Board and start a difficult self-assessment.”
In its statement on Thursday, the R.W.A. said it would do “whatever it takes” to “restore the trust we have lost.”
It added: “We hope you will join us — collaboratively and productively — in rebuilding an R.W.A. that serves its diverse and talented members well into the future. We believe this community is worth saving.”