Jennifer Dulos’s Husband Is Charged With Her Murder
Almost from the moment Jennifer Dulos went missing from her home in an affluent Connecticut suburb on May 24, detectives have kept their focus on the estranged husband with whom she was locked in a bitter divorce battle.
As the police investigated, determining that Ms. Dulos had been the victim of a serious physical attack, the evidence against the husband, Fotis Dulos, appeared to mount. They traced his suspicious movement via cellphone records, found his blood in her home and uncovered footage of him dumping bloody evidence in trash cans.
Still, even as Mr. Dulos was arrested and charged twice in the case, the police never accused him of attacking Ms. Dulos.
Then, on Tuesday, seven months after their investigation began, the police descended onto Mr. Dulos’s house, took him away in handcuffs and charged him with murdering his wife.
Officials have not yet found Ms. Dulos’s body. In their arrest warrant for Mr. Dulos, they said that “to date, the whereabouts of Jennifer Dulos is unknown.” They did not provide details of how she was killed or whether a weapon was used.
Yet with the charges, officials finally provided their answer to a question that sent law enforcement drones, cadaver dogs and helicopters across Connecticut and captured widespread attention: What happened to Ms. Dulos, a mother of five, in the hours after she dropped her children off to school?
The state police charged Mr. Dulos, 52, with murder, felony murder and kidnapping. In the warrant, they said they believed that he had attacked Ms. Dulos at her home in New Canaan, Conn., and had restrained her with zip-ties while she was still alive.
The police seemed to suggest that Mr. Dulos was motivated by financial need. They said in the warrant that he faced nearly $7 million in debt at the time Ms. Dulos was murdered, but that his children had trust funds of more than $2 million each.
Mr. Dulos would only have had access to that money if Ms. Dulos disappeared and he gained custody, the warrant said.
“Dulos can reasonably be expected to have been aware of these facts,” the warrant said.
Mr. Dulos’s lawyer, Norm Patis, said that Mr. Dulos “categorically” denied being involved with Ms. Dulos’s disappearance. He also criticized the charges, saying they outlined disparate theories for Ms. Dulos’s death.
“It’s shocking that the state’s not sure what theory they’re pursuing,” he said.
Officials also charged Mr. Dulos’s girlfriend, Michelle C. Troconis, 44, and a friend and onetime lawyer, Kent Mawhinney, with conspiracy to commit murder.
“Although we are relieved that the wait for these charges is over, for us there is no sense of closure,” Carrie Luft, who has been speaking on behalf of Ms. Dulos’s family, said in a statement.
“Nothing can bring Jennifer back,” Ms. Luft, a longtime friend of Ms. Dulos’s, said. “We miss her every day and will forever mourn her loss.”
Throughout their investigation, detectives had kept a focus on Mr. Dulos and Ms. Troconis. Both of them were charged in June with hindering prosecution and tampering with evidence. Another evidence tampering charge was added in September.
The two have pleaded not guilty to the previous charges against them and were free on bond before their arrest on Tuesday.
Ms. Dulos, 50, was last seen on May 24. That morning, law enforcement officials said, she drove her children to a private school in New Canaan, a wealthy community located about 45 miles north of Midtown Manhattan.
Ms. Dulos returned home around 8 a.m. Then, for hours, she did not respond to text messages or phone calls and failed to show up at several appointments in New York City, according to an arrest warrant for Mr. Dulos.
At around 4:40 p.m., Ms. Dulos’s nanny, Lauren Almeida, learned that Ms. Dulos had missed her children’s orthodontist appointment, the warrant said.
“My first thought was that Fotis did something,” Ms. Almeida told the police, according to the warrant.
Investigators went to Ms. Dulos’s $3.5 million home that evening. They found blood stains and spatters that led them to conclude she had been attacked. They also discovered Ms. Dulos’s blood mixed with Mr. Dulos’s DNA on a faucet, as well as evidence of an attempt to clean up the scene.
As they widened their search, investigators also found Ms. Dulos’s car abandoned about three miles from the house near Waveny Park, a vast expanse that was initially the focus of the search for Ms. Dulos.
Cellphone records and surveillance footage would show that on the same evening, Mr. Dulos and Ms. Troconis drove to Hartford, where they dumped trash bags filled with evidence, according to arrest warrants.
Among the items were clothing, a kitchen sponge, a clear poncho and four zip-ties that all contained Ms. Dulos’s blood or traces of her DNA.
The police presented a summary of their evidence to Connecticut’s chief medical examiner, Dr. James R. Gill. He determined that Ms. Dulos had sustained an injury or injuries that would have been “‘non-survivable’ without medical intervention,” according to the warrant.
Detectives first spoke with Mr. Dulos the day after his estranged wife was reported missing. The couple had been locked for years in a bitter divorce battle that involved hundreds of court filings in which the two exchanged accusations as they argued about visitation rights and custody of their children.
The couple had been married for 13 years when Ms. Dulos initiated divorce proceedings in June 2017. At the time, she immediately asked for an emergency order that would give her sole custody of the children, saying she worried that Mr. Dulos might hurt her or the children, or that he might kidnap the children and take them to Greece, where he was raised.
The prolonged legal battle brought mounting fees. Adding to the sum, Mr. Dulos was also involved in a lawsuit with the estate of Ms. Dulos’s deceased father, Hilliard Farber, that accused him of failing to pay back more than $1.5 million in business loans.
In the arrest warrant for Mr. Dulos, detectives used cellphone records and surveillance footage to track Mr. Dulos from his home in Farmington, Conn., to Ms. Dulos’s home, about 75 miles away.
In the warrant, the police said they believed that Mr. Dulos had borrowed a red Toyota truck from a work colleague on the day that Ms. Dulos was reported missing. They believed that he drove to New Canaan with a bicycle in the back seat and parked about 100 feet from the spot where Ms. Dulos’s car would later be discovered.
Surveillance footage in New Canaan showed a man in a hoodie and dark clothes riding a bicycle, similar to one owned by Mr. Dulos, heading in the direction of Ms. Dulos’s home, according to the warrant.
The police believe that Mr. Dulos attacked his estranged wife, then attempted to clean the crime scene between 8:05 a.m. and 10:25 a.m., according to the warrant. Then he drove the borrowed truck back to Farmington, the warrant said.
The employee who owned the truck, Pawel Gumienny, told detectives that Mr. Dulos later took it to be washed and detailed, which both surveillance footage and Ms. Troconis later confirmed.
Mr. Gumienny also said that Mr. Dulos told him that the seats in the Toyota needed to be replaced and eventually offered replacement seats from a different car, the warrant said.
He switched the seats but kept the original ones in case they were needed by investigators, according to the warrant. The police later found Ms. Dulos’s blood on one of them.
The swapped seats were one of many incidents described in the warrant in which the police suggested that Mr. Dulos appeared to be trying to cover his tracks.
During interviews with investigators, Ms. Troconis admitted that she and Mr. Dulos scrawled out false alibis for the days around Ms. Dulos’s death on handwritten documents in their Farmington home, the warrant said.
She told them that the pages, referred to as “alibi scripts,” contained events that never happened and that she could not account for Mr. Dulos’s whereabouts the morning of the alleged murder, the warrant said.
Mr. Mawhinney was named on at least one of the alibi scripts, the warrant said, and Ms. Troconis said that he was present in Mr. Dulos’s home the morning that Ms. Dulos disappeared.
Mr. Dulos, Ms. Troconis and Mr. Mawhinney were expected to appear in court on Wednesday. Mr. Dulos was being held on a $6 million bond, while Ms. Troconis and Mr. Mawhinney were being held on $2 million bonds, officials said.
Since Ms. Dulos was reported missing, her five children have been in the care of Ms. Dulos’s mother, Gloria Farber, who has filed for custody.