Teenagers in The Times: January 2020
Here is the January 2020 edition of Teenagers in The Times, a roundup of the news and feature stories about young people that have recently appeared across sections of NYTimes.com. We publish a new edition on the first Thursday of each month.
For ideas about how to use Teenagers in The Times with your students, please see our lesson plan and special activity sheet, both of which can be used with this or any other edition.
_________
Education
Why This Iowa Campus Is Erasing Political Chalk Talk
Iowa State University prohibited political slogans on sidewalks after students complained that the messages had become discriminatory and divisive.
Masks Are On. Games Are Canceled. Fear of the Coronavirus Comes to U.S. Colleges.
There has only been one confirmed case of the virus at a college campus, but anxiety is palpable in classes and dorms.
In a Homecoming Video Meant to Unite Campus, Almost Everyone Was White
The video was created to show off the University of Wisconsin. Instead, it set off a furor, and a reckoning over what it means to be a black student on campus.
What if Children Ran the School Lunchroom?
A new program lets students customize their meals, participate in taste tests and brainstorm ways to redesign their school cafeterias.
The Academic Apocalypse
“The crisis of English departments is also a crisis of faith,” writes the author of this Opinion essay.
_________
Civics, Politics, Economics and Business
Trump and the Teenager: A Climate Showdown at Davos
President Trump and Greta Thunberg dominated the first full day of the annual gathering of the rich and powerful in the Swiss Alps.
Greta Thunberg’s Message at Davos Forum: ‘Our House Is Still on Fire’
The activist punched a hole in the promises emerging from a forum of the global political and business elite at Davos, telling the leaders to stop investing in fossil fuels immediately.
Student Suspended Over Dreadlocks Is Invited to the Oscars by ‘Hair Love’ Team
DeAndre Arnold was told his dreadlocks violated his Texas high school’s dress code. Now he has been invited to the Oscars by the celebrity couple Gabrielle Union and Dwyane Wade.
Military Kids Change School Up to 9 Times. So Let’s Make It Easier.
“Legislation to help the children of service members is stalled in committee,” states this Opinion essay.
Right-Wing Views for Generation Z, Five Minutes at a Time
Dennis Prager believes teenagers are more open to conservative ideas than millennials. With PragerU, he’s making a play to get around their professors.
Will There Be a Draft? Young People Worry After Military Strike
Interest in the draft and “World War III” surged online, stalling the government website where young men are required to register. Here’s what you need to know.
When Are You Really an Adult?
America has been inconsistent at best when it comes to deciding what 18- to 21-year-olds are too young, or just old enough, to do.
Court Quashes Youth Climate Change Case Against Government
Two of three judges on the panel said that climate change was an issue for lawmakers, not the courts.
An Overlooked Danger: School Shootings After Hours
Since mid-August, gunfire has erupted more than 20 times at or near school sporting events around the country, more shootings than took place during school hours.
How a High Schooler Scooped Everyone on the Iowa Poll
Three times now, Arjav Rawal has tweeted the results before their official release, beating even CNN, a poll sponsor.
2020 Democrats on Their 18-Year-Old Self
We asked the candidates what their 18-year-old self would think of them now.
‘Doorbell Ditch’ Prank Led to Crash That Killed 3 Teens, Officials Say
Prosecutors said that a Southern California man intentionally rammed into a car full of teenagers after they tricked him.
Doctors Could Face Criminal Charges for Treating Transgender Teens
In South Dakota and other states, lawmakers are considering bills that would restrict access to hormone treatment and surgeries for young transgender people.
Mother of ‘Success Kid’ Demands Steve King Stop Using His Meme
She fears the copyrighted photo of her son, now 13, will become associated with the “bigotry” of Representative King, an Iowa Republican who used it in a campaign fund-raising ad.
_________
Science, Health, Technology and Sports
My Phoneless 11-Year-Old Was Lost in Manhattan and Survived
I’m sticking to my principles on not getting smartphones for my tweens — even though my child got lost on the dark streets of New York City.
Panicking About Your Kids’ Phones? New Research Says Don’t
A growing number of academics are challenging assumptions about the negative effects of social media and smartphones on children.
My Son’s Friends Use Slurs in Online Games. What Can I Do?
You might say to your son, “While your friends might think they’re being funny or cool, words can do harm, and repeating slurs is fundamentally degrading to the groups they are used against.”
‘Techlash’ Hits College Campuses
Facebook, Google and other major tech firms were every student’s dream workplaces. Until they weren’t.
How’s Your Internship Going? This Teen Found a Planet
Wolf Cukier, 17, was analyzing brightness of stars during an internship with NASA last year when he made the discovery.
Teens Find a Big Loophole in the New Flavored Vaping Ban
The policy allows mint, dessert and fruit flavors to continue to be sold in disposable e-cigarettes, prompting many teens to switch from Juul to those devices.
At 16, She’s a Pioneer in the Fight to Cure Sickle Cell Disease
Helen Obando is the youngest person ever to get a gene therapy that scientists hope will cure the disease, which afflicts 100,000 Americans.
When Heavy Periods Disrupt a Teenager’s Life
“Someone’s menstrual period should not be impairing them from leading a normal life, because we have really good treatments for pain and for heavy bleeding,” an expert says.
Will We Ever Figure Out How to Talk to Boys About Sex?
This Opinion essay states, “Teenagers and young men still don’t have the right vocabulary. Can we help them get there?”
Why Are Young Americans Killing Themselves?
“Suicide is now their second-leading cause of death,” states this Opinion essay.
Young Crash Victims Shared Kobe Bryant’s Passion for Basketball
More details emerge about the helicopter crash that killed Kobe Bryant. Also: An early encounter with the star.
I Hate Football. I Let My Daughter Play It Anyway.
“My husband and I believe that children should be allowed to take some reasonable risks, but football tested our resolve,” writes the author of this Opinion essay.
Officials Called ‘Redmen’ a Racist Mascot. Then Voters Weighed In.
The symbol was removed in a Connecticut town. Now, newly empowered Republicans are restoring it.
Sofia Kenin Emerges as a Fierce Counterpuncher Against Coco Gauff
Reaching her first Grand Slam singles quarterfinal had the No. 14 seed in tears.
_________
Arts, Media and Culture
Billie Eilish Sweeps Top Awards at the Grammys
The 18-year-old won five Grammys, including record of the year and best new artist, at a ceremony in which Kobe Bryant, who died on Sunday, was mourned.
Billie Eilish: Gen Z’s Outrageous Fashion Role Model
The Grammy-winning artist is showing young people a path to being themselves.
This Is ‘Little Women’ for a New Era
The characters are ambitious, angry and they have agency. How Greta Gerwig adapted a 150-year-old text for our time.
A Show Reminds Young Audiences: We All Got Here From Somewhere
“Cartography,” a multimedia work inspired by migrants’ stories, presents their journeys as universal and heroic, not merely tales of suffering.
7 Great Contemporary Novels for Teenagers
These books about teenagers growing up today combine literary chops with the special sauce that keep adolescent readers turning the pages.
A School Where the Student Body Is Obsessed With Student Bodies
In Scarlett Thomas’s new novel, “Oligarchy,” the skinny girls rule the roost.
‘José’ Review: Coming of Age Gay in Guatemala
A teenager uses online romantic connections to escape the oppression of his hometown.
_________