On Politics: Where Are the Candidates Going?
With the caucuses looming, any space in Iowa can become a political venue. Take, for example, this museum that sells historical furniture, RVP-1875, which hosted a Buttigieg event on Wednesday in Jefferson, Iowa.
Sanders waded into a closely watched House race in Texas on Wednesday by endorsing Jessica Cisneros, a 26-year-old immigration lawyer running a progressive campaign to unseat Representative Henry Cuellar, one of the most conservative Democrats in Congress.
Cisneros was one of the nine congressional candidates Sanders threw his weight behind, including all four members of “the Squad.” Cisneros is the only one seeking to knock out a Democratic incumbent. She now has the backing of two presidential candidates; Warren endorsed her in September.
Cisneros, for her part, has not yet committed to supporting a presidential candidate. One of the people Sanders endorsed Wednesday — Ayanna Pressley, a first-term Massachusetts congresswoman and “Squad” member — had already backed Warren for president.
Like many candidates, Sanders has increasingly looked beyond the first four nominating states and has tried to ramp up support in Super Tuesday states like Texas. Biden and Warren have the most endorsements in the state so far.
Until recently, Texas appeared to be a long shot for Sanders, but a Texas Lyceum poll administered this month found him in a virtual tie with Biden, and 13 points ahead of Warren.
The president’s impeachment trial hit a fever pitch on Wednesday as it entered the question-and-answer phase.
The White House and Senate Republicans were pushing for a quick end to the proceedings, working aggressively to discount John Bolton’s revelations and line up the votes to block new witnesses from testifying.
Trump’s legal team put forth a number of arguments that immediately struck some scholars as outlandish. One was from Alan Dershowitz, who said that anything a president does to aid his re-election could be considered in the nation’s interest, and would therefore not be impeachable. Expect more of the same on Thursday.
One of Wednesday’s most startling scenes occurred just outside the Senate chamber, when Lev Parnas, a former associate of Rudy Giuliani who has been indicted over his involvement in the Ukraine affair that set off impeachment, arrived at the Senate to get a peek at the proceedings.
Our colleague Patricia Mazzei got a firsthand view of what happened next.
Sandwiched between the Super Bowl’s pop music-filled halftime show and the kickoff of the second half, Mike Bloomberg’s campaign is hoping to “stop people in their tracks” with an emotional ad featuring a mother who lost her son to a random act of gun violence.
The 60-second ad, which cost $11 million to reserve, features a mother talking about her son, George, who was killed by gunfire while he was in college.
Bloomberg himself decided the ad should focus on gun control. The campaign said it did not worry about running a weighty, emotional ad amid the lighter beer and snack-food ads that tend to fill commercial time during the actual game.
“Amid the dancing raisins and souped-up cars, a mother speaking fundamental and powerful truths about her experience and her son’s loss will draw an awful lot of attention,” Howard Wolfson, a top adviser to Bloomberg, said in an interview. “Deservedly so.”