When the ‘King of Debt’ Is the President
To the Editor:
In “Business Got Big Tax Cut; Lobbyists Made It Bigger” (front page, Dec. 31), you report: “The budget deficit has jumped more than 50 percent since Mr. Trump took office and is expected to top $1 trillion in 2020, partly as a result of the tax law.” President Trump often bragged about being “the king of debt.” Soon the burgeoning budget deficit will lead to him being the king of national debt.
Trump supporters who aren’t rich seem unfazed by his being a reverse Robin Hood who gives to the rich by borrowing money that will have to be paid back by all of us — and our children and grandchildren. They seem to be focused only on the present benefits to the economy and their pocketbooks. Like Scarlett O’Hara they say: “I’ll think about that tomorrow. . . . Tomorrow is another day.”
Does Mr. Trump understand the difference between private sector debt and national debt? Now that he is C.E.O. of America, I fear how his glib attitude toward debt (and bankruptcy) will play out.
Michael Biales
Acton, Mass.
To the Editor:
The headline for your article should have been: “Under Trump, the Rich Get Richer While Food Stamps Are Cut and the Deficit Grows.”
Jean Berman
Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Re “Democrats May Save Us Yet,” by Paul Krugman (column, Dec. 20):
If American democracy is to survive, it’s imperative that voters who stayed home or who couldn’t abide Hillary Clinton — even for the singular purpose of opposing Donald Trump — rethink the wisdom of their decision.
While it’s still unknown who the Democratic nominee in 2020 will be, there isn’t the slightest question that Donald Trump will stop at nothing to remain in office.
It’s our collective responsibility to prevent that from happening. Choosing the lesser of two evils may feel depressing. Would an indefinite future in a totalitarian state feel better?
Cathy N. Goldstein
New York
To the Editor:
Re “The Decade of Disillusionment,” by Ross Douthat (column, Dec. 29):
My 28-year-old son said to me last year: “We were lucky to elect Trump. He might inoculate us against another more effective authoritarian.” An interesting perspective.
Mr. Douthat writes that the 2010s “exposed the depth of problems without suggesting plausible solutions.”
I want to offer another take on disillusionment. All my life Americans seemed to believe that our country was practically perfect in every way. Exceptional. Until we get over that, until most of us can accept that other countries may have better health care at lower cost and that our citizens could be better educated, we cannot move.
I cheer disillusionment as a step toward the movements, leaders, spiritual renewal and structural reforms that Mr. Douthat longs for.
Christine Johnson
Portola Valley, Calif.
To the Editor:
Ross Douthat has coined a term that perfectly captures my mental state at the end of 2019 — “prosperous despair.” Yes, my bank account is fatter, but I am also often depressed and anxious about the world around me. For example, the devolution of politics into tribalism is terrifying.
James Carville famously coined the phrase “It’s the economy, stupid.”
Maybe true in the more innocent 1990s, but in the “post-truth” era, I’ve learned that it’s not that simple.
Janice Gewirtz
Mountain Lakes, N.J.
To the Editor:
Re “The Decade We Changed Our Minds,” by Charles Blow (column, Dec. 30): What troubles me about culture in America is the strengthening dogmatism of superwoke culture and its consequences: to restrain freedom of speech and thought, and to dismiss as intellectually inferior or immoral those who disagree with the flock. We need to make an effort in the United States to be content with disagreement, and to embrace compromise — something that, until relatively recently, anchored and enriched American culture.
Political correctness embraces conformity over truth, sensitivity over reality. We’re not getting to the truth because it can be construed as offensive. Americans are walling themselves off from those who may have differing political opinions or worldviews, and in turn, marinating in self-indulgence and self-reinforcement. This lays bare a society that is losing its sense of common fraternity.
The lesson is: It’s not the end of the world to hear something we disagree with. Accept ideological diversity. Respect one another. Heed the advice of a famous figure in American literature, Atticus Finch: “You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view … until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.”
Daniel Dolgicer
New York