What to Cook This Week
Good morning. I’ve been in school the past few weeks, learning about design thinking and the pleasures of failing fast as a Sulzberger fellow at the Columbia Journalism School, under the tutelage of Corey Ford. It’s been a whirlwind of long, no-device days, working alongside amazing journalists and news executives from all over the world, but I’ve been cooking and eating like a graduate student, which is to say: on the fly, late, with ingredients gathered at the H-Mart on 110th Street. It has taken me deep into a style of cooking that the television cook Sandra Lee describes as “semi-homemade.”
Kimchi fried rice, made improvisationally, with banchan gathered from the cold aisle! Freestyle mapo ragù, to serve over frozen rice cakes quickly boiled. A manager’s special of marinated sliced short ribs, broiled and cut into a version of Kay Chun’s bulgogi Bolognese. Once, a bucket of Korean fried chicken, schlepped home on the subway to eat lukewarm with cucumbers and jarred kimchi, which in truth was kind of a grim meal. I live a long way from Columbia.
So, today: from-scratch deliciousness and a luxurious few hours at the stove. I’m thinking Jamaican oxtail stew (above), with coconut rice, and when I’m done there’ll be leftovers and that oxtail gravy will be great on Monday for lunch, over what remains of the grains.
Monday night, I’m thinking, could be terrific for this tomato and white bean soup, super garlicky and soothing. (If it’s white beans you need and not the tomatoes and garlic, I’m solution-agnostic: Here are 19 recipes for those creamy, dreamy legumes.)
On Tuesday, check out Lidey Heuck’s new recipe for citrus salmon with an arugula salad, very cosmopolitan, super debonair.
For Wednesday dinner, I’m thinking you could go the opposite direction and make Ali Slagle’s recipe for a sheet-pan Italian sub. Or, if that’s too much for you in the midweek doldrums, an improv amatriciana, no-recipe recipe style?
Thursday seems right for Julia Moskin’s spicy peanut stew with ginger and tomato.
And Friday, I think, would be a perfect time to introduce yourself and those you serve to Yewande Komolafe’s new recipe for skillet chicken with couscous, lemon and halloumi. (Not for you? I can’t imagine, but here are many other recipes for cooking with a cast-iron skillet.)
We have a lot — like, a lot — of other recipes to cook this week waiting for you on NYT Cooking. Just take out a subscription to access them, if you haven’t already, and take part in the joy of browsing the site and apps.
You can also see what we’re up to on Facebook. And delight in our photography on Instagram, too. We link to the news we gather on Twitter. And, yes, we’re on YouTube — come take a tour of Melissa Clark’s kitchen!
And you can always reach out to us if something goes wrong with a recipe or if you’re confused about our site and apps. Just write cookingcare@nytimes.com. We will get back to you. (You can write me directly if you’re mad about it, or if you want to be supernice: foodeditor@nytimes.com.)
Now, it has precious little to do with the price of saffron, but Longreads hipped me to this short story I think you ought to read, by Dina Nayeri in The Yale Review, “The Pinch.”
And while you’re at it, here’s John Ismay in The Times, on a Gulf War myth that won’t die, and why it matters.
I kinda forgot how great this drum-off between Will Ferrell and Chad Smith from the Red Hot Chili Peppers was, on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,” back in 2014.
Finally, a favor to ask. If you like this newsletter I send you, would you forward it to a few friends who maybe don’t know about it? They can sign up to receive it themselves right here. Thanks. Either way, I’ll be back tomorrow.