What’s on TV Wednesday: ‘The Curse of La Llorona’ and ‘Night on Earth’
THE CURSE OF LA LLORONA (2019) Stream on HBO platforms. The threat is veiled (in the literal sense) in “The Curse of La Llorona,” a horror movie about a killer spirit who takes the form of a weeping woman in a wedding dress. The movie casts Linda Cardellini as Anna, a widow with two children, a job in social services and a problem audiences can probably extrapolate from the film’s title: She’s cursed. Or, rather, she picks up a curse that comes in the form of La Llorona (Marisol Ramirez), a weeping woman who starts terrorizing the family. (The character is based on a figure from Mexican folklore.) “More efficient than ambitious, ‘La Llorona’ is basically a maternal showdown with shock cuts and billowing curtains,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The New York Times. “The director Michael Chaves, making the most of his silkily mobile, at times predatory camera (he likes to shift the point of view mid-prowl) delivers the horror classics nicely.” One of the movie’s producers is James Wan, known for the “Saw” and “Conjuring” movies. Fans of either of those series should be well served here.
NIGHT ON EARTH Stream on Netflix. For a night with fewer terrors than “The Curse of La Llorona,” consider this new Netflix nature documentary series, which uses high-tech cameras to capture the natural world after dark. Samira Wiley (“The Handmaid’s Tale,” “Orange Is the New Black”) narrates.
VINCERE (2010) Stream on Hulu; rent on Google Play, iTunes and YouTube. The Italian director Marco Bellocchio is back in United States theaters this weekend with “The Traitor,” a crime drama about the real-life Sicilian mob figure Tommaso Buscetta. Bellocchio also plumbed history in this biographical drama, which mixes fact and fiction to tell the story of the relationship between Benito Mussolini (played by Filippo Timi) and his reputed first wife, Ida Dalser (Giovanna Mezzogiorno), before and during Mussolini’s rise to power. It’s a movie that deals in matters of both personal (love and betrayal) and international (it’s about Mussolini) scope; Manohla Dargis called it “a sustained, alternatingly exhausting and aesthetically exhilarating howl of a film” in her review for The Times.
ALL THE MONEY IN THE WORLD (2017) 6 p.m. on FXX. It was an alley-oop heard around the film world: Weeks before this historical thriller was released, Ridley Scott enlisted Christopher Plummer to take over the role of J. Paul Getty, replacing Kevin Spacey after Spacey was accused of sexual misconduct. (“At my age, which is enormous, you get worried that your memory won’t hold up,” Plummer said in an interview with The Times in 2017, discussing how he felt when Scott approached him with the challenge. “But this was too damn good to pass up.”) The movie offers plenty of drama in front of the camera, too: It focuses on the 1973 kidnapping of Getty’s 16-year-old grandson, John Paul Getty III. The recovery involves the efforts of the younger Getty’s mother (Michelle Williams) and a former C.I.A. operative (Mark Wahlberg).