Earthquake Strikes Eastern Turkey, Killing 22
ISTANBUL — An earthquake with a preliminary magnitude of 6.7 shook eastern Turkey on Friday night, killing at least 22 people, injuring hundreds and causing tremors in three neighboring countries, the authorities said.
The earthquake struck just before 9 p.m. in eastern Elazig province, Suleyman Soylu, Turkey’s interior minister, told reporters. At least 225 people were injured in Elazig and another 45 people were hurt in the nearby province of Malatya, southwest of the epicenter, provincial officials said. More than 1,000 people sought treatment at hospitals for injuries, anxiety and heart attacks after the quake.
Mr. Soylu told NTV television that rescue workers were trying to reach survivors after a four-story building collapsed in the town of Maden. One person was rescued from the rubble there, he said. Four or five buildings collapsed in Sivrice, where two people were hurt, he said.
“We are hoping we will not have more casualties,” Mr. Soylu said, according to the Anadolu news agency.
But Mr. Soylu told journalists in Elazig on Saturday that the death toll had risen to 22. He also said that 39 people had been removed alive from collapsed buildings.
The defense minister, Hulusi Akar, told reporters that there were no reports of casualties in Sivrice, a town of about 4,000 people near the site of the earthquake, according to The Associated Press, but he said the quake may have caused deaths or injuries in rural areas outside the town. Troops were on standby to help, he said.
The U.S. Geological Survey said the quake registered a preliminary magnitude of 6.7 and was also felt in Syria, Georgia and Armenia.
Village chiefs, or mukhtars, in the area of Turkey affected by the earthquake reported extensive damage in interviews with news media and said people could be left homeless. Temperatures in the region were expected to drop to about 10 degrees overnight, according to the Turkish State Meteorological Service.
In March 2010, an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.0 struck 61 miles from the town of Elazig, killing 51 people. One village was largely destroyed and four others were heavily damaged. A second quake with a 5.6 magnitude subsequently hit the same area, among scores of aftershocks.
In western Turkey in 1999, a 7.4 magnitude earthquake that struck the city of Izmit killed more than 17,000 people.