Afghan War Casualty Report: February 2020
At least 34 pro-government forces and seven civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week. Although American and Taliban officials agreed to a seven-day reduction in violence beginning on Sunday, The Times confirmed 12 separate attacks that resulted in casualties between the start of the temporary truce and Thursday evening. The deadliest attack took place in Balkh Province, where a Taliban red unit attacked a security outpost in Para Barat village of Charkint District, killing five pro-government militia members and two civilians. Four militia members and one civilian were also wounded in the battle. In Sar-i-Pul Province, the Taliban attacked Korak-e-Arabia village security outposts in the provincial capital, killing four security forces and wounding 10 others.

Feb. 27 Kabul Province: one civilian killed
A bomb attached to a bicycle exploded in the Sixth Police District in Kabul, killing one civilian and wounding 10 others. No one has claimed responsibility for the explosion yet.
Feb. 27 Balkh Province: one police officer killed
A local police officer who was transporting water to a security outpost was killed when his vehicle hit a roadside bomb in the Asiab Khan village of Chimtal District.
Feb. 26 Logar Province: one civilian killed
A child was killed by an unexploded mortar shell leftover from clashes between Afghan forces and the Taliban in Charkh District.
Feb. 26 Kandahar Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was killed in a roadside-bomb explosion in Khakriz District.
Feb. 26 Ghazni Province: one pro-government militia member killed
The Taliban kidnapped and killed a pro-government militia member in the Moshaki area of Qarabagh District as the militia made its way to Ghazni from Kabul.
Feb. 25 Zabul Province: one police officer killed
One officer was killed and another was wounded when their police vehicle hit a roadside bomb in Arghandab District.
Feb. 25 Ghazni Province: two soldiers killed
Taliban fighters ambushed a military convoy in the Baran Qala area of Qarabagh District, killing two soldiers and wounding a third.
Feb. 24 Farah Province: three members of border security killed
Three members of border security were killed when their vehicle hit a roadside bomb in Jawand District.
Feb. 24 Ghazni Province: two police officers killed
The Taliban kidnapped and killed two police officers in the Qala area of Qarabagh District as they traveled to Ghazni from Kabul, the capital.
Feb. 24 Balkh Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban killed a local police officer in the Chimtal-e-Markazi area of Chimtal District.
Feb. 24 Balkh Province: five security forces and two civilians killed
A Taliban red unit attacked a security outpost in the Para Barat village of Charkint District, killing five pro-government militia members and two civilians. An additional four militia members and one civilian were wounded.
‪Feb. 23 Balkh Province: one police officer killed‬
A police officer was shot and killed by the Taliban as he was walking toward his parents’ home in the Yangi Qala village of Chimtal District.
‪Feb. 22 Ghazni Province: two police officers killed‬
The Taliban kidnapped and later killed two police officers who were traveling to the Nawrozkhil area of Qarabagh District from Muqur District in a private vehicle.
Feb. 22 Uruzgan Province: one soldier killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in Chinarto District, killing one soldier.
Feb. 22 Uruzgan Province: two soldiers killed
A military vehicle hit a roadside bomb on the outskirts of Tarin Kot, the provincial capital, killing two soldiers and wounding two others.
Feb. 22 Uruzgan Province: one soldier killed
The Taliban attacked an army outpost on the highway connecting the provinces of Uruzgan and Kandahar, killing one soldier.
Feb. 22 Balkh Province: four security forces and one civilian killed
The Taliban attacked Zareh District, killing two police officers, two soldiers and one civilian. Eight security forces and two civilians were wounded.
Feb. 21 Faryab Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked the center of Khwaja Sabz Posh District, killing one police officer and wounding three others.
Feb. 21 Badghis Province: two civilians killed
The Taliban attacked security outposts in the center of Qadis District, where two civilians were killed in the crossfire. It was unclear who was responsible for their deaths. Local authorities claimed 11 insurgent fighters were killed in the clash.
Feb. 21 Faryab Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked the center of Shirin Tagab District, killing one police officer and wounding another. Local authorities claimed that two Taliban members were also killed.
Feb. 21 Sar-i-Pul Province: four security forces killed
The Taliban attacked security outposts in the village of Korak-e-Arabia, in the provincial capital of Sar-i-Pul, killing four members of security forces and wounding 10 others. Local authorities claimed that during the battle Afghan air forces targeted Taliban locations, killing nine fighters and wounding 13 others.
At least 47 pro-government forces and 24 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week, which began with an agreement between American and Taliban officials to reduce violence in Afghanistan with the goal of eventually beginning peace talks. The deadliest attack took place in Kunduz Province, where the Taliban attacked an outpost in the Se Darak area of Kunduz City, the provincial capital, killing 15 soldiers and wounding three others before capturing the outpost and seizing the remaining weapons and equipment. Earlier in the week, in Nangarhar Province, nine civilians were killed in U.S. airstrikes on two civilian vehicles in the Kakarak area of Surkh Rod District.
Feb. 20 Takhar Province: four local police killed
The Taliban attacked a local police outpost in eastern Khwaja Ghar District center last night, killing four local police officers. Local officials say five Taliban were also killed and that the attackers were pushed back.
Feb. 20 Helmand Province: one civilian killed
A retired police officer was killed when a bomb exploded in front of his house in Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital.
Feb. 18 Faryab Province: two security forces killed
The Taliban attacked security outposts in the center of Shirin Tagab District, killing one commando and one army soldier. Four additional soldiers and two pro-government militia members were wounded in the battle, which continued for more than three hours.
Feb. 18 Kapisa Province: nine pro-government militia members killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Dara-e-Afghania area of Nejrab District, where fighting continued for four hours. Nine pro-government militia members were killed and the outpost was destroyed by insurgents.
Feb. 18 Sar-i-Pul Province: three police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a local police outpost in Aqtash village of Sar-i-Pul City, the provincial capital, killing three police officers and wounding four others before escaping from the area as reinforcements arrived.
Feb. 17 Kunduz Province: 15 soldiers killed
The Taliban attacked an outpost in the Se Darak area of Kunduz City, the provincial capital, killing fifteen soldiers and wounding three others before capturing the outpost, destroying four Humvees, and seizing the remaining weapons and equipment.
Feb. 17 Faryab Province: one pro-government militia member killed
The Taliban shot and killed a pro-government militia commander in Arab Aqsay village of Pashton Kot District and seized his weapon.
Feb. 17 Jowzjan Province: two security forces killed
A police officer and a member of the National Directorate of Security were kidnapped and killed by the Taliban when they were patrolling in the Murdian District. The Taliban seized weapons from both members of security forces.
Feb. 17 Herat Province: one civilian killed
Abdul Rahim, the only court judge in Injil District, was returning home from prayer when he was shot and killed by unknown gunmen on motorcycles in Kahdestan village.
Feb. 17 Herat Province: five civilians were killed
Four women and one child, all family members of Mullah Ahmad, a Taliban commander, were killed in an airstrike by Afghan air forces in the village of Arabah in Kushk-e-Robatsangi District. Mullah Ahmad and two other Taliban fighters were also killed in the airstrike, which targeted the vehicle in which the family was traveling.
Feb. 17 Kunduz Province: one civilian a killed
One 8-year-old child was killed and eight members of a family, including four women, one man and three children, were wounded when a mortar fired by the Taliban hit a house in the Second Police District of Kunduz City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 17 Faryab Province: one pro-government militia killed
The Taliban attacked the center of Almar District, killing one pro-government militia member and wounding one police officer over two hours of fighting.
Feb. 17 Sar-i-Pul Province: one civilian killed
The Taliban entered houses and attacked military bases in the Yumchi village of Sayyad District, killing a 10-year-old child and wounding two civilians and two army sergeants.
Feb. 17 Badghis Province: one civilian killed
One civilian was killed and five others, including three children, were wounded when their vehicle hit a roadside bomb in the village of Qal-Zardak in Moqor District.
Feb. 16 Helmand Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was killed and two others were wounded during a military operation in Nawa District. Local authorities claimed that two Taliban members were also killed.
Feb. 16 Faryab Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked an outpost in the center of Gorziwan District, killing one police officer wounding four others.
Feb. 16 Kandahar Province: two police officers killed
An armed man on a motorcycle in the Salokhan Chaman area of Dand District killed two police officers and escaped from the area.
Feb. 14 Sar-I-Pul Province: five civilians killed
Taliban members entered a house in the Balghali village of Sar-i-Pul, the provincial capital, and killed five civilians, including three former Taliban members who supported the government and were living a civilian life.
Feb. 14 Kunduz Province: six pro-government militia members killed
Six pro-government militia members were killed in an insider attack in the Aaqi Bai area of Imam Sahib District. Two militia members, who investigators suspect were Taliban infiltrators, killed their colleague while he was guarding a security tower. After the initial attack, insurgents entered the post and killed an additional five militia members while they were asleep. The Taliban also seized all weapons and equipment.
Feb. 14 Nangarhar Province: nine civilians killed
Nine civilians returning from a picnic in Khogyani District were killed by U.S. airstrikes on their vehicles in the Kakarak area of Surkh Rod District.
At least 33 pro-government forces and 15 civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week. The deadliest attack took place in Kabul City, where a suicide bomber detonated his explosive in the Fifth Police District, killing four security forces and two civilians while wounding more than a dozen others. Shortly after, police forces found and defused a car bomb, while government officials said the Taliban was responsible for the attack. Earlier in the week, a person in an Afghan army uniform opened fire on Afghan troops and American forces in Sherzad District in Nangarhar, killing two American service members and one Afghan soldier. An additional six U.S. service members and three Afghan soldiers were wounded in the incident, which both American and Afghan delegations are investigating. On Monday, President Trump conditionally approved a peace deal with the Taliban, contingent on a reduction of violence by the group over a test period of seven days later this month. Should the deal go forward, the U.S. will gradually begin withdrawing its troops from Afghanistan and direct negotiations between Afghan and Taliban leaders would begin.
Feb. 12 Baghlan Province: one civilian killed
The Taliban attacked Kabul-Baghlan Highway in Doshi District, killing a truck driver, destroying his truck and taking two civilians prisoner.
Feb. 11 Badghis Province: one child killed
One child was killed and another was wounded in a roadside bomb explosion in the Nedami area of Laman village in Qala-e-Naw City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 11 Kunduz Province: five children killed
A bomb exploded inside a madrasa in the Sharawan area of Dasht-e-Archi District, killing five children and wounding three others. All the victims were under the age of 14.
Feb. 11 Helmand Province: four police officers killed
A roadside bomb hit a security force vehicle in the center of Nawa District, killing four police officers and wounding another.
Feb. 11. Kabul Province: four security forces and two civilians killed
A suicide attacker detonated his explosive in Charah-e-Qambar area of the Fifth Police District in Kabul City, the provincial capital, killing four security forces and two civilians while wounding five security forces and eight civilians. Later on, a car bomb was discovered and defused by police forces. Government officials said the Taliban were responsible for the attack.
Feb. 10 Herat Province: one police officer killed
One police officer was shot and killed by gunmen on a motorcycle in the Second Police District of Herat City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 10 Helmand Province: one police officer killed
A police officer in the center of Greshk District was shot and killed by the Taliban, who also seized his weapon.
Feb. 10 Helmand Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Eighth Police District of Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital, killing one police officer and wounding three others.
Feb. 10 Baghlan Province: three police officers killed
A military convoy of intelligence and police forces were traveling to Takhar Province from Kabul when they were ambushed by the Taliban in the Jangal Bagh area of Baghlan-e-Markazi District. Three police officers were killed and 33 police officers and members of the National Directorate of Security were wounded over 12 hours of fighting, during which three military vehicles were destroyed.
Feb. 9 Helmand Province: four police officers killed
Four police officers were killed and another was wounded in a car bomb explosion in Greshk District.
Feb. 9 Nangarhar Province: two American service members and one Afghan soldier killed
A person in an Afghan army uniform opened fire on Afghan soldiers and American Special Forces in Sherzad District, killing two U.S. service members — Staff Sgt. Javier J. Gutierrez and Staff Sgt. Antonio R. Rodriguez of Seventh Special Forces Group — and one Afghan soldier. An additional six U.S. service members and three Afghan soldiers were wounded in the incident, according to Afghan Ministry of Defense. Both American and Afghan delegations were appointed to investigate the incident.
Feb. 9 Takhar Province: two civilians killed
The Taliban attacked the Maash Aaba and Qabr-e-Zubair areas of Dasht-e-Qala District, leading to a clash with security forces. In the ensuing battle, a mortar fired by the insurgents hit a house, killing one child and wounding four others. A shopkeeper was also killed in the crossfire.
Feb. 9 Kunduz Province: two police officers killed
A roadside bomb hit a military Humvee in the Mosazai area, located between Khan Abad and Ali Abad Districts, killing two police officers, including a platoon commander, and wounding three others.
Feb. 9 Kunduz Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban ambushed patrolling security forces in the center of Ali Abad District, killing one local police officer and wounding another before being pushed back.
Feb. 9 Badakhshan Province: one security force killed
A pro-government militia commander was killed and another militia member wounded by a Taliban ambush in Baharak District.
Feb. 9 Kunduz Province: two civilians killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Godam area of Dasht-e-Archi District, killing two civilians, a husband and his wife, in the crossfire.
Feb. 7 Jowzjan Province: one civilian killed
One 10-year-old child was killed and two others wounded while playing in a former security outpost in Darzab District, where an unexploded bomb had been left behind.
Feb. 7 Takhar Province: one civilian killed
A bodybuilder was kidnapped and later killed by the Taliban while traveling in the Khowaja Pesta area of Kunduz City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 7 Balkh Province: two soldiers killed
Two soldiers were killed as they attempted to defuse a roadside bomb placed by the the Taliban in Chimtal District.
Feb. 7 Balkh Province: one soldier killed
The Taliban attacked security outposts in the center of Shor Tepa District, killing one soldier and wounding another over two hours of fighting. Local authorities claimed that five Taliban fighters were killed by an airstrike as well.
Feb. 7 Herat Province: one police officer killed
Ahmadshah Khan Jalali, a police commander in Herat Province, was shot and killed when a soldier opened fire on his vehicle in the Naw Abad area of the 15th Police District of Herat City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 7 Kandahar Province: two security forces killed
Unknown gunmen killed a police officer and a member of the National Directorate of Security in the 14th Police District of Kandahar City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 7 Baghlan Province: one police officer killed
One local police officer was killed during a Taliban ambush in the Hussainkhil area of Pul-e-Khumri City, the provincial capital.
Feb. 7 Faryab Province: one soldier killed
In Dawat Abad District, the Taliban kidnapped a soldier in his vehicle and killed him. The soldier was traveling to Takhar Province to attend his brother’s funeral.
At least 23 pro-government forces and seven civilians were killed in Afghanistan during the past week. The deadliest attack took place in Sar-i-Pul Province, where the Taliban ambushed a pro-government militia in the capital and killed the commander, one of his soldiers and an additional four members of the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan’s intelligence agency. One day earlier, in Kunduz Province, the Taliban attacked a security outpost in Ali Abad District, killing five police officers and wounding three others before security forces successfully pushed the insurgents back.
[Read the Afghan War Casualty Report from previous weeks.]
Feb. 4 Badghis Province: one police officer killed
A police officer was killed in a Taliban sniper attack in the village of Firoozah in Muqur District.
Feb. 4 Faryab Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked the center of Shirin Tagab District, where fighting continued for three hours. One member of a police special forces unit was killed, as were two Taliban fighters, according to local authorities.
Feb. 3 Faryab Province: one pro-government militia member killed
The Taliban attacked the Sofi Qala area of Qaisrar District, killing one pro-government militia commander and wounding eight other soldiers.
Feb. 3 Sar-i-Pul Province: six security forces killed
The Taliban ambushed a pro-government militia commander in the Takhta area of Sar-i-Pul City, killing one commander, one of his soldiers and an additional four members of the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan’s intelligence agency. Three other security forces were wounded.
Feb. 3 Herat Province: one civilian killed
One employee of Islam Qala customs house was shot and killed by unknown gunmen in the village of Rouzanak in Ghoryan District. The attackers managed to escape from the area.
Feb. 2 Herat Province: one police officer killed
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in the village of Shouz in Kohzour District, killing one police officer, while local authorities claimed two insurgent fighters were also killed in the clash.
Feb. 2 Kunduz Province: two civilians killed
An employee of the education department and a former jihadi commander were kidnapped by the Taliban while traveling from Kunduz City, the provincial capital, to Khan Abad District. Both civilians were killed within two hours of the kidnapping.
Feb. 2 Herat Province: one civilian killed
One civilian was shot and killed by unknown gunmen in a Mosque during prayer in the village of Qodus Abad in Kohsan District. The reason for the attack remains unclear.
Feb. 2 Kunduz Province: five police officers killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the entrance of Ali Abad District, killing five police officers and wounding three others before security forces eventually pushed the insurgents back.
Feb. 2 Baghlan Province: two soldiers killed
A Taliban red unit attacked security outposts and military bases in the center of Borka District, killing two soldiers and wounding six others. Local authorities also claimed that two Taliban fighters were killed and eight others were wounded.
Feb. 1 Badakhshan Province: two security forces killed
The Taliban ambushed pro-government militia members near the Amu River in Shahri Buzurg District, killing two of them and seizing their weapons.
Feb. 1 Herat Province: three security forces killed
One local police officer and two pro-government militia members were killed in a Taliban attack on a local police outpost in the village of Kariz Khani in Kushk-e-Robatsangi District.
Jan. 31 Uruzgan Province: one civilian killed
During a military operation in the area, a house was bombed by an American aircraft in Tarin Kot, the provincial capital, killing one child and wounding another child and his mother.
Jan. 31 Faryab Province: two civilians and one soldier killed
The Taliban attacked a security outpost in the Sarband Village of Qaramqul District, killing one soldier. During the clash, a mortar shell hit a nearby house, killing two children and wounding two others. It was not clear who fired the mortar.