Lesson of the Day: ‘The Census Begins Where It Has Struggled Before: Remote, Frozen Alaska’
Featured Article: “The Census Begins Where It Has Struggled Before: Remote, Frozen Alaska”
Since 1790, the United States has every 10 years conducted a census, a count of every person living in this country. The results of the census determine congressional representation and federal spending on things like education, housing and food assistance. However, getting an accurate count is challenging, often because of language barriers, distrust of the government or remoteness of where people live.
In the featured article, Emily Schwing and Mike Baker write about the official start to the 2020 census in Toksook Bay, Alaska, a village on the edge of the frozen Bering Sea. Their reporting illuminates the difficulties and limitations in collecting data in remote areas and shows how that mirrors struggles across the country. In this lesson, you will not only read about the situation in Alaska, but also look at census data in your community and brainstorm for more effective ways to collect that information.
What do you know about the census? Are you aware of the kinds of questions that are asked? Do you know how the census is conducted?
Watch this two minute video from the United States Census Bureau and then respond to the questions below.
If you’re curious, you can preview the 2020 census questions so you know what questions are asked and why.
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. What are some of the reasons that it has been difficult to gather census data in places like Toksook Bay?
2. According to the article, why might President Trump’s now-abandoned proposal to ask about citizenship status affect people’s response to the census?
3. What are some of the strategies that the Census Bureau is using to try to get the most accurate count? What are some of the actions that have been taken by Donna Bach, a partnership strategist?
4. What is the connection between census data and resources in Alaska’s Native villages like Toksook Bay?
5. Why was Nicole Borromeo, the general counsel for the Alaska Federation of Natives, “shocked” when she heard the advertising campaign that census leaders prepared? What are some of her critiques and concerns about the process?
6. How have individuals like Kevin Allis, the chief executive of the National Congress of American Indians, and Robert Pitka, a local tribal administrator in Toksook Bay, taken action to ensure an accurate count of their communities?
The United States Census Bureau created a Response Outreach Area Mapper to identify hard-to-survey areas in an effort to ensure accuracy in the 2020 census. Do you think your town or neighborhood was accurately counted in the 2010 census? What makes you think that?
Go to the ROAM app and enter your home or school address. As you navigate the surrounding areas, you will be able to see the estimated Low Response Score for your community.
Take Action: If you have time, think about how you could educate your family or community about the importance of participating in the 2020 census. What do you think would help people in your community or across the country feel more comfortable participating in the census?
Make a list of resources or tools that you think could be helpful. You can see if any of those tools already exist on the Census 2020 website or decide to create a resource on your own. You might create a video public service announcement, a flyer or a fact-sheet. Or, you might just have conversations with the people you know.
Additional Teaching Resources: Teachers, if you want more census-related resources, take a look at the 2020 Census Statistics in Schools (SIS) program, which offers lesson plans, maps and videos geared to middle school, high school and English language learner audiences.