$500 Million for the Homeless Targeted in  Scheme With Bogus Addresses
One company was supposedly based in a vacant house in New Jersey. Another company had no office; its address was a post office box inside a shipping store in Nassau County. A third operated out of a Harlem apartment.
The companies were all listed in paperwork as subcontractors for Childrens Community Services, a nonprofit that the city has paid about $500 million since 2017 to provide roughly 1,900 units for homeless people, including families with children.
Authorities believe that the nonprofit defrauded New York City through a network of at least six subcontractors that did not appear to provide the supplies and services listed on invoices, according to a lawsuit the city filed against the nonprofit on Wednesday. The fraud could be millions of dollars, but the lawsuit was not specific.
Two days earlier, federal prosecutors and investigators from the city Department of Investigation executed search warrants at the offices of Childrens Community Services and the addresses of the subcontractors.
Steven Banks, the city commissioner of social services, said the alleged fraud had no direct impact on the homeless served by the nonprofit.
Nonetheless, the city took the unusual step of asking a judge to place Childrens Community Services under receivership, seeking to take over the nonprofit’s operations of 28 shelters, including 25 in commercial hotels.
The city would then seek other nonprofits to run the buildings and continue services. “We’re seeking a remedy that the city has never sought before,” Mr. Banks said.
One of the subcontractors, SASY Enterprises, is owned by Peter Weiser, and appeared to be connected to at least two other subcontractors.
“I have lots of comments about it. My lawyer told me not to speak to anyone,” Mr. Weiser said.
SASY Enterprises, based in Lawrence, N.Y., was supposed to prepare so-called cluster apartments, which are private apartments used as shelters. The agreement between Childrens Community Services and SASY showed that SASY charged a fee for getting the apartments ready, and a 25 percent markup on gas and electric bills as well as on construction materials and furniture.
Another subcontractor, AZ Security Services, sold the nonprofit 301 computers for about $118,000, even though the company was only authorized to maintain computers, not supply them.
AZ Security Services listed an address at a post office box inside a Go Ship! store in Cedarhurst, a town bordering Lawrence.
“When DHS staff contacted AZ to inquire about computer purchases, the person answering the phone at AZ was unable to state where AZ’s business operation was located,” according to the lawsuit.
Mr. Weiser acknowledged to The New York Times that he was related to AZ Security. When asked if he was related to Ruth Mandelbaum, the chief operating officer of Childrens Community Services, he said he was not. Old court documents showed that Ms. Mandelbaum might have used the name Ricki Weiser.
Mr. Weiser called back twice to say he had misunderstood the questions and needed to retract his statements. “Everything I told you I take back. I’m sorry I didn’t follow my lawyer’s advice,” he said.
Irregularities in the nonprofit’s billing were first noticed by Department of Homeless Services staff in the spring of 2018; they saw that the nonprofit was hiring subcontractors without approval from the city, and were submitting questionable invoices.
Mr. Banks said the city had refused to pay the invoices connected to the dubious subcontractors and denied the nonprofit’s application to run two new shelters.
The agency referred the matter to the Department of Investigation in May 2018, and put the nonprofit on a corrective action plan. But the homeless services agency could not simply terminate the contract and had to let the investigation play out, Mr. Banks said.
The lawsuit and search warrants come as Mayor Bill de Blasio and his administration are struggling to manage the city’s homelessness crisis. Council members and advocates for homeless people have questioned why the mayor has not prioritized building low-income housing over opening new shelters and have chided the city for doing business with unscrupulous landlords and nonprofits.
Childrens Community Services is one of the city’s newest and best-paid homeless services providers. The nonprofit began working for the city in 2014 by providing emergency operations of commercial hotels used as shelters and cluster housing.
By 2017, the city had awarded the nonprofit major contracts totaling nearly $700 million, fueling its growth: In 2017, the nonprofit listed assets of about $54 million; three years earlier, it listed $388,000 in its tax forms.
But less than a year into its new contract agreements, staff at the Homeless Services Department began noticing strange billing practices, as news reports swirled that questioned why the city would award a new nonprofit such large contracts.
In another example, AMX Distributors was supposed to supply appliances to cluster housing, but the invoices did not list the brand, make or model number of any of the items bought, according to the lawsuit.
In October 2019, the Department of Homeless Services asked for a price list from AMX, which was located inside a Harlem apartment and had no known warehouse. Instead, Childrens Community Services gave the city agency a price list created in an Excel spreadsheet “just minutes before CCS sent it to DHS.”
“The price list contained numerous typographical errors, using words such as ‘frezzer’ and ‘vynal,’” the city said in the lawsuit.
In another questionable billing practice, an invoice showed that Childrens Community Services had leased a 2018 Ford from a car dealership in Queens, but a check for about $38,000 was issued to Supreme Auto Leasing in Teaneck, which the city said had an address that belonged to a vacant house.
“I have no idea what you’re talking about. This is a really strange phone call,” said a man who answered the phone at a number listed for Supreme and identified himself as Steve Sherman.
Mr. Sherman said the address listed in the lawsuit is not a vacant building and “is a place of business.”
A person answering the phone at the nonprofit’s office in Jamaica, Queens, said she was directed to refer all questions to the Homeless Services Department. She said Thomas Bransky, the chief executive officer, and Ms. Mandelbaum were not in the office.