Mellon Foundation Grants $4.5 Million to Academy of American Poets
The Academy of American Poets said on Thursday that it would be able to fund its poet laureate program for the next three years with a $4.5 million grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
The academy started the program last year, issuing grants ranging from $50,000 to $100,000 to poets representing states, cities and other regions. It was created in response to the growing number of poets laureate in the United States, said Jennifer Benka, the academy’s president and executive director. But, she added, “almost all of these positions are not funded or are funded very modestly, while the poets serving in these roles are doing a lot of work.”
In an interview this week, Elizabeth Alexander, the Mellon Foundation’s president and also a poet, said the grant would help the academy expand the program.
“I have so much faith in the leadership of the Academy of American Poets, in the whole concept of the poets laureate project, and in what I think is poetry’s underrecognized ability to communicate with outsized power,” she said.
The first 13 poets were announced in April, selected for their literary merit and contributions to public life. Claudia Castro Luna, the poet laureate for Washington State, is spending her year as a fellow conducting poetry readings along the Columbia River in partnership with other writers and local organizations. Their aim is to highlight the waterway’s status as a vital natural resource and its significance to the area’s indigenous peoples.
Molly Fisk, another 2019 recipient, has funded 22 poets through the California Poets in the Schools program to lead workshops that encourage students to write poems in response to the state’s recent wildfires. Ms. Fisk is the poet laureate of Nevada County, Calif., which is just 70 miles from Paradise, a town that was decimated by the Camp Fire in 2018.
The Mellon Foundation contributed a $2.2 million grant last year for the laureate program and returned this year to bolster its reach.
“I think there’s something that’s special and important about doing this big enough that it can be in so many different American communities simultaneously,” Alexander said. “The ability to get a kind of textured map of the whole country is something that’s very exciting.”
In April, which is National Poetry Month, 10 to 20 new fellows will be named.
Public service is just one component of what a poet laureate does. The academy’s fellowships are also designed to encourage their creative output.
“One thing I can promise you,” Alexander said, “is that there will be at least some poems made in the next few years, under the aegis of this work, that will stand the test of time.”