Shelter From Life’s Storms
I started doing crossword puzzles in the seventh grade.
My parents subscribed to three daily newspapers, only one of which, The Baltimore Sun, had a comics section. One morning, after finishing “Broom Hilda” and “Wizard of Id,” I stared blankly at the checkerboard grid in The Sun’s Style section. I still had a half bowl of cereal to finish, so I grabbed a pen and started filling in clues.
I’ve always solved my puzzles in pen. Pencil is so tentative, and being able to erase incorrect letters somehow feels like cheating. I like seeing the squares overwritten with thick scrawls of ink — they’re proof of my labor. Back then, after I completed a puzzle, I would scribble “DONE!!!” in all capital letters, add the date and my initials (D.A.A.), and circle it.
When The Sun became too easy, I moved on to the real challenge: The New York Times Crossword. This was during Eugene Maleska’s tenure as crossword editor and I didn’t get very far. I was 12, and my knowledge of baseball players, Hebrew months and French pronouns was fairly limited.
I hadn’t really learned how the Times puzzle worked yet: The recurring answers, the increasing difficulty, the puns and question marks. Wading into a Times puzzle, even a Monday one, took all my concentration.
That turned out to be a good thing.
My home life was noisy: My parents, both college professors, were first-generation Polish Jews who bickered nonstop. They adored each other, but constant verbal sparring was the only way they knew how to display that love. Sometimes alone, other times in front of company. There’d be fights about politics, about morality, or just about some chore that hadn’t been done.
My brother had just gone off to college, and crossword puzzles were a haven from my parents’ fighting. Years later I learned that my mother had bipolar disorder, but at the time I thought it was just her chaotic temperament. Crosswords, to me, were the exact opposite. They were orderly and predictable. And there was guaranteed to be a solution. It was reassuring to a boy who could not count on predictability in other areas of his life.
Crosswords also provided a distraction from certain realities I was becoming increasingly aware of, like how I wasn’t popular or athletic. And that I was attracted to boys instead of girls. While curled up on the couch filling in squares, I didn’t have to police how I talked or walked.
I knew I needed to improve my solving, but in an era before the internet that meant turning to the smartest person I knew: my father.
Dad and I had been slowly drifting apart for some time. He began to withdraw after his mother, my grandmother, was given a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease when I was 8. And while he was more bookworm than jock, he didn’t quite know what to make of a child who wasn’t athletic, and who was prone to crying and eating sleeves of Oreo cookies. Like a lot of little gay boys in the 1980s, I was terrified he’d pick up on subtle tells about my nascent sexuality. So I withdrew from him too, and clung to my mother’s apron strings.
But now, with crossword puzzles, there was an opportunity for us to work together. A way to make him proud of me that didn’t involve throwing a ball. Or bringing home a girl.
Dad was a voracious reader and an even bigger trivia nut than I was. He knew the names of old baseball players, classic movies, military history — the categories that are the bedrock of Times crosswords. He heartily agreed to help me.
So at least once a week and sometimes more often, I’d come to him with an incomplete puzzle. I’d toss him a clue, let him know how many letters it had and show him any squares I’d filled in. Working on the puzzle together also required us to be physically close. It was an intimacy that had once scared me. Now, all these years later, I miss it.
It went on that way for the next decade: I’d work on a puzzle for a day or two and then bring it to him to help me complete it, or at least get close. Even when I went off to college, he’d save puzzles for us to do on holidays and summer vacation.
After I graduated from college and moved to New York, though, my visits home to Baltimore were fewer and further between. When I did get home, there just didn’t seem to be enough time to dig into a puzzle with him. By then, though, I had my own Times subscription and was doing them solo. Not to brag, but by then I was completing Sunday puzzles with some regularity.
I don’t believe that Dad ever really did crosswords on his own. It was always something we did together. Looking back, it was spending time with me that gave him joy, not the puzzles themselves. For me, I guess it was both.
When the app for the New York Times Crossword puzzle came out, my habit turned into something of an obsession. I’m a fidgety person and need something to occupy my brain or else I get antsy. Some people surf Instagram, others play Candy Crush. I fire up the crossword app.
I usually tackle the new puzzle on my commute to work and then dive into the archives by lunchtime. According to my stats, I’ve completed more than 1,800 puzzles. (I’m working backward, so right now I’m wading through late 1999.)
Most people think it’s cute or at least harmless, though a few friends have called me out for solving crossword puzzles instead of engaging with them in conversation. Guilty as charged. I wanted to reignite my crossword relationship with my father, but Dad never really understood smartphones, let alone apps. He appreciated that I was still solving puzzles, but couldn’t fathom how you’d do them on a phone.
About three years ago, my parents’ health began to decline rather quickly. I realize now it had been happening for some time, but they did their best to cover. And I probably did my best to remain in denial. At first my mom’s cognition was the issue, but it soon became apparent that Dad was struggling, too. His mother had Alzheimer’s disease. So did his sister, my aunt. It seemed pretty apparent that the disease was claiming him, too.
Eventually we had to move him and Mom into assisted living. Released of the burden of playing caregiver to my mother, he seemed at peace. But it was hard. Here was a man who defined himself by his intellect, and it was slipping away. The one pastime we had always bonded over — solving crossword puzzles — was now a cruel symbol of what he was losing.
Today, he still recognizes me but is fairly noncommunicative. Like many children of Alzheimer’s patients, I went through a complicated process of grieving someone who is still technically alive.
Every few weeks I make the two-hour trek to see him, furiously doing crossword puzzles en route to steady my nerves.
Whether I’ll get this disease isn’t something I spend a lot of time contemplating. Partly because there’s no treatment or cure, but more likely because I’m still so devastated by how it’s ravaging my father.
Once in a while, when I find myself stuck on a clue that Dad would have gotten, a wave of grief swells inside me. But I’m getting better at keeping it contained and thinking instead of all the good times — and tough puzzles — that we shared.
I’ll worry about myself after he’s gone. For now, I’ll keep doing my puzzles.
Dan Avery is a journalist who lives in New York. He has written for Newsweek, NBC News, Logo TV and The New York Post.
Illustration by Nhung Lê.
Tell us a story! Do you have a story about how puzzles have had an impact on your life or a relationship? Our submission guidelines are here.