Trump Releases Mideast Peace Plan That Strongly Favors Israel
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Tuesday unveiled his long-awaited Middle East peace plan with a flourish, releasing a proposal that would give Israel most of what it has sought over decades of conflict while offering the Palestinians the possibility of a state with limited sovereignty.
Mr. Trump’s plan would guarantee that Israel would control a unified Jerusalem as its capital and not require it to uproot any of the settlements in the West Bank that have provoked Palestinian outrage and alienated much of the world. Mr. Trump promised to provide $50 billion in international investment to build the new Palestinian entity and open an embassy in its new state.
“My vision presents a win-win opportunity for both sides, a realistic two-state solution that resolves the risk of Palestinian statehood to Israel’s security,” the president said at a White House ceremony that demonstrated the one-sided state of affairs: He was flanked by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel but no counterpart from the Palestinian leadership, which is not on speaking terms with the Trump administration.
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority immediately denounced the plan as a “conspiracy deal” unworthy of serious consideration, making the decades-long pursuit of a so-called two-state solution appear more distant than ever. “We say a thousand times over: no, no, no,” Mr. Abbas said on Tuesday in Ramallah, in the West Bank.
As part of the proposal, Israel agreed to limit its settlement construction in a four-year “land freeze,” during which Palestinian leaders can reconsider whether to engage in talks.
But before returning to Israel on Tuesday, Mr. Netanyahu told reporters that he would ask his cabinet to vote Sunday on a unilateral annexation of the strategically important Jordan River Valley and all Jewish settlements in the West Bank, a move that is sure to further inflame the Palestinians.
Nearly three years in the making, Mr. Trump’s plan is the latest of numerous American efforts to settle the seemingly intractable conflict between Israel and the Palestinians. But it was a sharp turn in the American approach, dropping decades of support for only modest adjustments to Israeli borders drawn before 1967 and discarding the longtime goal of granting the Palestinians a wholly autonomous state.
The reaction of key Arab governments to the plan was mixed. In a statement, Jordan’s foreign minister affirmed his country’s support for an independent Palestinian state based on pre-1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital and warned against “the dangerous consequences of unilateral Israeli measures, such as annexation of Palestinian lands.”
But a statement from the United Arab Emirates’ ambassador to Washington, Yousef al-Otaiba, called the plan “a serious initiative that addresses many issues raised over the years.” And Saudi Arabia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a muted statement saying that it “appreciates the efforts of President Trump’s administration to develop a comprehensive peace plan.”
Mr. Trump said in outlining his plan that “it is only reasonable that I have to do a lot for the Palestinians, or it just wouldn’t be fair.”
Still, the plan does far more for Israel than it does for the Palestinians, whose proposed state would not have a standing military and would be required to meet other benchmarks overseen by the Israelis, including a renunciation of violence and the disbandment of militant groups like Hamas, which is based in Gaza.
Some analysts said the larger goal of Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Netanyahu’s was to shift the starting point of any future negotiations sharply in Israel’s favor and to put the Palestinians in the defensive position of saying no.
Mr. Trump called on Mr. Abbas, who played no substantive role in shaping the plan, to join talks with Israel’s government. “President Abbas,” Mr. Trump said, “I want you to know that if you choose the path to peace, America and many other countries, we will be there. We will be there to help you in so many different ways.”
Mr. Trump’s announcement ended years of suspense over a highly anticipated peace plan that was widely criticized even before its details were known. Rather than viewing it as a serious blueprint for peace, analysts called it a political document by a president in the middle of an impeachment trial working in tandem with Mr. Netanyahu, a prime minister under criminal indictment who is about to face his third election in a year.
But the guests invited to the East Room, including the conservative Republican megadonor Sheldon G. Adelson and evangelical Christian leaders, greeted the plan with enthusiastic applause.
“It’s a big opportunity for the Palestinians, and they have a perfect track record of blowing every opportunity they’ve had in their past,” Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, who oversaw the plan, told CNN on Tuesday. He urged Palestinian leaders to “stop posturing” and accept the plan.
Mr. Trump took a sterner tone at the White House. Whereas past American presidents have sought to cajole the Palestinians to accept a deal, Mr. Trump issued them a warning.
“After 70 years of little progress, this could be the last opportunity they will ever have,” Mr. Trump said, though a Democratic successor could prove much friendlier to the Palestinian cause.
The proposal imagines new Israeli borders that cut deep into the West Bank and what Mr. Netanyahu has previously described as a Palestinian “state-minus” that lacks a military capable of threatening Israel. The White House called it “a demilitarized Palestinian state” with Israel retaining security responsibility west of the Jordan River, although over time, the Palestinians would assume more of that responsibility.
Mr. Trump said it was the first time that Israel had authorized the release of such a conceptual map illustrating territorial compromises it would make. He said it would “more than double Palestinian territory” while ensuring that “no Palestinians or Israelis will be uprooted from their homes.”
But under the plan, those Palestinians would find themselves virtually encircled by an expanded Israel and living within convoluted borders reminiscent of a gerrymandered congressional district. The proposal also envisions a tunnel connecting Gaza to the West Bank.
Mr. Trump, who loves to claim that he has outdone his predecessors, noted that several past presidents had “tried and bitterly failed” to achieve peace. “But I was not elected to do small things or shy away from big problems,” Mr. Trump said.
Mr. Netanyahu agreed that Mr. Trump had devised a “realistic path to a durable peace” that “strikes the right balance where others have failed.” But his move to annex West Bank territory could make any practical dealings with the Palestinians even more difficult.
“Front-loading the annexation seems to destroy the plan on the very day it’s released,” said David Makovsky, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy who was a member of Secretary of State John Kerry’s Middle East negotiating team. “It reaffirms the worst fears that this is more an annexation plan than a peace plan.”
A new Palestinian state would have a capital, to be called Al Quds, that would include some of the outer portions of East Jerusalem. The plan would preserve the status quo at the sprawling compound that Jews call the Temple Mount and Muslims call the Noble Sanctuary, or Al Aqsa, which is the name of one of two main Islamic shrines there. The location is the holiest place in Judaism and the third-holiest place in Islam, and has been the site of numerous clashes over the years. Muslims would continue to be permitted to visit Al Aqsa Mosque.
A White House official said Mr. Trump’s proposed $50 billion economic plan for the new Palestinian state would create one million new jobs over 10 years, double the size of the Palestinian economy, cut poverty in half and reduce unemployment to below 10 percent. The money would be supplied by international donors, chiefly in Arab nations.
Mr. Kushner and a small circle of Trump officials chose not to pursue the traditional path of brokering talks between the two parties that could lead to a joint proposal but to hand one down from Washington.
Working secretively, Mr. Kushner and his team — which included the American ambassador to Israel, David M. Friedman, a strong supporter of Israeli settlement construction — consulted closely with Mr. Netanyahu’s government. But their contact with Palestinian officials ended after Mr. Trump announced in December 2017 that he would move the United States Embassy to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv.
In the near term, the 181-page plan will be an issue in both American and Israeli politics. Mr. Trump is sure to cite its warm welcome by Israeli leaders on the 2020 campaign trail as he courts conservative Jewish voters and evangelical Christians who back Israeli expansion in the Holy Land.
Mr. Netanyahu will welcome it as a distraction from his criminal indictment six weeks before Israel’s elections on March 2.
Democrats were largely critical. Senator Chris Van Hollen of Maryland sent a letter to Mr. Trump on Tuesday, signed by 11 of his colleagues, calling the proposal a “one-sided” blow to prospects of a “viable” two-state solution.
“Previous presidents of both parties successfully maintained the respect of both Israelis and Palestinians for the United States’ role as a credible player in difficult negotiations. Your one-sided actions have made that impossible,” the senators wrote, calling the plan “a recipe for renewed division and conflict in the region.”
Mr. Trump’s potential opponents were similarly withering, a reminder that a Democratic victory in the presidential election in November could result in a much different approach.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont said the proposal was “unacceptable” and called for an end to “the Israeli occupation.” Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts wrote that a plan lacking Palestinian involvement “isn’t diplomacy, it’s a sham.”