From Armed Struggle to Peaceful Protest, a Road Still to Travel
LONDON — From a small prefabricated office in a northwest London suburb, a satellite television channel has been broadcasting since the early days of the Arab Spring in 2011, offering Algerians a viewpoint that their country’s tightly controlled state channels do not give.
The main voice on its programs, Abdullah Anas, is little known in the West but a giant in jihadi circles from the 1980s war in Afghanistan against the invading Soviet Army.
A lifelong Algerian activist from student days, Mr. Anas, 61, spent 12 years with the Afghan mujahedeen and then served as a close aide to Abdullah Azzam, the Palestinian professor and preacher often called the father of the international resistance to the Soviet occupation.
Since those days, Mr. Anas has become a champion of peaceful change and dialogue, not only for Algeria but for restive societies across the Muslim world. In Afghanistan, he helped facilitate the first exploratory peace talks with the Taliban in 2006.
“Really, I can say with full confidence, it is a new chapter for the Algerian people,” he said in an interview this week as the protests in Algeria approached their first anniversary. Compared to violent clashes with protesters in Lebanon and Iraq, and Algeria’s own bloody past, he said the Algerian protest movement was setting a new example. “In one year not one drop of blood was lost, praise be to God.”
Mr. Anas remains in exile in England, since he risks arrest by the military-dominated government if he returns to Algeria. Nevertheless, he has been closely involved in shaping and encouraging the protest movement through the satellite channel, Al-Magharibia TV, which live-streams the protests and commentary on the internet, puncturing a virtual government news media blackout.
Born in 1958, Mr. Anas grew up in the small town of Ben Badis in eastern Algeria, and recalls a happy childhood in the optimistic post-colonialist period. His family, like thousands of Algerians, moved from the old Arab quarter into homes abandoned by the French colonialists after independence in 1962.
After his father became deeply religious, the young Mr. Anas was sent to a madrasa, or religious seminary, for his schooling, and later studied with a preacher of the Tablighi group of Muslim missionaries. It was in 1980, after having read a magazine article, that he was inspired by the idea of fighting jihad in Afghanistan.
In Afghanistan he came to work closely with Mr. Azzam, and later married his daughter. He helped Mr. Azzam run the Arab Services Bureau, which organized the participation of Arab volunteers in the Afghan jihad.
In a memoir published last year, “To the Mountains: My Life in Jihad from Algeria to Afghanistan,” Mr. Anas sought to correct what he called many of the myths about the Arab volunteers that arose after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks. Foremost among those, he said, was the notion that thousands of them fought in Afghanistan. By his count, there were only around a hundred committed fighters in Afghanistan at any one time.
He describes his time in Afghanistan as helping guide the volunteers in religion and moral behavior as much as military activity, and mediating between warring Afghan factions as much as fighting the war.
But he is also frank about the damage that extremists and sectarianism have done to the course of jihad — including those who perpetrated the Sept. 11 attacks and those, who remain unidentified, who assassinated his father-in-law.
“I will never denounce jihad,” he writes. “As a Muslim I know this to be a noble deed, the peak of perfection — where man can be the most beastly, he chooses to be humane.”
To Mr. Anas, as to most Muslims, jihad — literally, “struggle” — is a fundamental principle of the Muslim faith. Defending your country and other Muslims against occupation and repression, they believe, will be rewarded in heaven.
But he distinguishes that sort of jihad from what in Islam is often called “offensive jihad,” removing impediments to the spreading of Islam. Islamic jurists have argued in the past that impediments can include political powers, which can lead to armed struggle against established governments. Mr. Anas said he believes this concept has no place in the modern age.
“The door must be closed,” he writes. “Why should we fight a people irrespective of their religion just to bring them into the sphere of Islam even if they don’t convert?”
There are many ways to pursue jihad peacefully, he said.
“The word jihad is not just taking a Kalashnikov,” he said. “The word jihad is wider in Islam: media jihad, academic jihad, legal jihad, money jihad, thinktanks jihad, politics jihad, diplomacy jihad. Fighting is just one part of it.”
After the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, Mr. Anas returned to Algeria in 1990 but was detained — his relationship with Mr. Azzam made him a person of extreme interest for the Algerian authorities — and after his release began a life of precarious exile with his young family.
He went back to Afghanistan for several years, rejoining the legendary guerrilla commander Ahmed Shah Massoud, whom Mr. Anas considered a friend and mentor. It was there in the early 1990s that he learned of the first democratic stirrings in Algeria, watching election rallies on videos carried over the mountain passes.
He knew the leaders of the Islamic Salvation Front, or F.I.S., and followed from afar their success in local elections and then the crackdown that followed as the military government imposed martial law, plunging Algeria into a decade of savage civil war.
Looking back, Mr. Anas said, Algerian society was not ready for the suddenness of what he called the “remote-control change” of 1992 but he blamed the military government for the deadly violence. “I understand democracy cannot be born with one press” of the button, he said. “But what I cannot understand was, ‘You had more than one option, why did you go for the bloody option?’”
After a decade of bloodletting, Algerians accepted the rule of Abdelaziz Bouteflika because he offered a respite from violence. Even as the Arab world exploded in protests in 2011, Algeria remained quiet.
Then suddenly in 2019 Algerians blew up in anger when Mr. Bouteflika, wheelchair-bound and barely able to speak after a stroke, proposed to run for a fifth term as president. They haven’t stopped since.
“Now they are one year in the streets, on Tuesday the students and on Friday all Algerian people,” he said. “They are academics, workers, agricultural workers, ordinary people, scholars, lawyers, politicians, you cannot imagine, in the street, side by side, men and women, Islamists and non-Islamists, all repeating very simple slogans.”
He said the protesters, like those across the Arab world, want justice and rule of law. “If you have a legal state, a state of law, it is not a problem if you want to be Muslim Brotherhood, or Islamist, or secularist,” he said.
The protesters forced Mr. Bouteflika’s resignation and the arrest of his brother, but rigged elections brought in a new president from the same old ruling circle. “Completely the old and the miserable chapter,” as Mr. Anas put it.
Yet, he remains optimistic and insists the only way ahead is through dialogue, even if it takes five or 10 years to persuade the military to allow free elections. “The Algerian movement is not under pressure,” he said. “I am saying, ‘Hang on, be patient.’”
He remains engaged as well in Afghanistan, where he sees a new generation of Afghans who no longer care about old divisions.
“You have 30 to 35 million Afghans, most of them in the cities, it is not necessary to be Taliban, to be pro-American against Taliban, it is not necessary to be Communist,” he said. “We have initiatives, we have the minds of the new generation saying ‘listen to us, we have our own way, we can do it, we can solve the problem, but give us a chance.’”