The Pain of the Holocaust Echoes Through Three Israeli Novels
HOUSE ON ENDLESS WATERS
By Emuna Elon
Translated by Anthony Berris and Linda Yechiel
309 pp. Atria. $27.
Yoel Blum’s mother, a Holocaust survivor, explicitly warned him never to go to Amsterdam, the city of her birth and his own, but he has no idea why. Nevertheless, Yoel, an Israeli writer, has obeyed her, even after her death — until his agent demands that he go to the Netherlands to promote the Dutch translation of his third novel.
As Yoel and his wife tour the city together in Elon’s jewel box of a novel, they visit the Jewish Historical Museum. It is there that they glimpse, in a series of old black-and-white film clips, images of a family at a wedding. The family is composed of a young man and woman, each holding a child — a little girl and a little boy. Yoel and his wife realize that the woman in the film is Yoel’s mother, standing with the father he never met, who died in the Holocaust. And while the little girl is obviously Yoel’s sister, he is stunned to see that the boy in his mother’s arms is, just as obviously, not him.
Back in Israel, he confronts his sister, who tells him all she knows. But Elon masterfully allows Yoel to grapple with the meaning of the film clip off the page — fueling the reader’s curiosity. Rather than recounting the siblings’ conversation, Elon sends Yoel back to Amsterdam, where we are plunged into his efforts to write the story of his secret past in the city where it occurred.
Elon powerfully evokes the obscurity of the past and its hold on the present, as we stumble through revelation after revelation with Yoel. As we accompany him on his journey to recreate his history, we share in his loss, surprise and grief, right up to the novel’s shocking conclusion.
TO THE EDGE OF SORROW
By Aharon Appelfeld
Translated by Stuart Schoffman
291 pp. Schocken. $26.95.
The trauma of the Holocaust also figures in Appelfeld’s novel, which was first published in Israel in 2012, six years before his death. The book’s narrator, 17-year-old Edmund, is a Jewish boy in Eastern Europe whose schoolwork suffers because he is preoccupied with love for a beautiful gentile girl. Then, abruptly, war arrives, and a fence is erected between the Jewish ghetto and the people and places of Edmund’s prewar life. When his family is summoned for deportation to what in all likelihood will be a death camp, his parents tell him to run away and leave them behind on the platform. He does so, managing to join up with a ragtag resistance group of a few dozen Jews in the Ukrainian forest.
We learn the details of Edmund’s past in flashbacks, as he struggles to endure the arduous conditions as well as his own survivor’s guilt. He finds solace in the men with whom he finds himself — a motley crew, from the strong and impassioned commander, Kamil, to two children who have been brought along. Their time is consumed not only with weapons training and frequent raids for food and supplies, but also with study: The books they find in abandoned Jewish homes are their most prized possessions; reading and discussing them — Kamil likes to cite Martin Buber and Dostoyevsky — helps to keep their Jewish identity alive.
Surviving the horrors of the Holocaust, Appelfeld suggests with characteristic terseness, entails more than simply the fight to keep breathing. “Every Hebrew word we acquire is a gift,” Kamil tells his men. “It holds within it so much of our spiritual property. Do not forget, we are the last guardians of these treasures.”
The partisans make it their goal not only to preserve their past, but also to secure their future by rescuing as many Jews as possible. The struggle to save others is a moving one. As one elderly survivor says to Edmund, with great wonder: “Even after disgrace and humiliation and abuse, people rise up from the dust to revive and help others.”
THE TEACHER
By Michal Ben-Naftali
Translated by Daniella Zamir
184 pp. Open Letter. Paper, $14.95.
Elsa Weiss, a Tel Aviv high school teacher, seemed a closed book to her students and colleagues. Both inside and outside the classroom, she was cold and distant, with few evident human connections. So when she ended her life by jumping from her apartment balcony, her death was as inexplicable as her life.
Thirty years later, one of her students becomes a teacher and, confused by his memories of Elsa, tries to reconstruct her life. Ben-Naftali’s novel recounts the results of the student’s investigation: a portrait of a mysterious woman cobbled together from the scant traces she left behind — a poignant memorial to someone whom no one remembers. While the sections recounting the narrator’s memories of and thoughts about Elsa feel unnecessary, the story he tells about her is absorbing and well crafted.
He imagines her growing up in Hungary, a happy and playful girl who eventually marries a man simply because it’s the thing to do rather than out of deep feeling. She finds herself in a life she wouldn’t have chosen: wearing a yellow star, trapped in a Jewish ghetto and a lackluster marriage, stunned by the indifference of the world around her. Then, when the deportations begin, Elsa’s parents give her and her husband their own spots on the Kastner train — which transported more than 1,000 Jews purchased from Adolf Eichmann by the Hungarian journalist Rudolf Kastner. After weeks of travel, Elsa makes it to Switzerland, and, eventually, to Israel, where, having left her husband, she joins her brother, a man from whom she finds herself as alienated as she is from everyone else in her world.
“The Teacher” suggests that Elsa’s loneliness was her greatest lesson, showing us how the Holocaust could break even those who survived it.