Trump Impeachment: Highlights From Tuesday’s Senate Trial
Republicans early Wednesday morning pushed through ground rules for President Trump’s impeachment trial on a party-line vote of 53 to 47.
The adoption of the trial rules ended more than 12 hours of acrimonious debate in which House managers and White House lawyers clashed over the role of the Senate in seeking additional evidence relevant to the accusations against Mr. Trump of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress.
Under the rules, orchestrated by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, the House managers and Mr. Trump’s lawyers will each have 24 hours over three days to argue their cases for and against the articles of impeachment. Senators will have 16 hours to ask questions, submitted in writing. After that, the Senate will again consider the matter of whether to subpoena witnesses or documents, at which point a few Republicans have signaled they may be open to doing so.
The Senate convened shortly after 1 p.m. Tuesday to start in earnest the trial of Mr. Trump, who faces charges that he abused the power of his office and obstructed Congress. Senators were warned that they had to remain quiet, a skill that they rarely exercise in the Senate chamber, or face imprisonment.
Unlike most other debates in the Senate, the elected senators did not do the actual debating.  Instead, the seven House impeachment managers, who are serving as prosecutors in the case, and Mr. Trump’s legal defense team argued over the rules that will govern the proceedings.
In vote after vote — 11 in total — Republicans turned back Democratic efforts to subpoena records from the White House, the State Department and other federal agencies and compel testimony from John R. Bolton, the former national security adviser, Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, and two other administration officials.
The amendments sought documents that the Trump administration had refused to release, including correspondences between Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and other top officials and records from the Office of Management and Budget, which handled the suspension of military aid to Ukraine that is now at the center of the impeachment inquiry.
Democrats have argued that the documents are critical for the Senate to conduct a fair trial. The amendment involving State Department documents would have allowed lawmakers to subpoena records involving Gordon D. Sondland, the United States ambassador to the European Union. Mr. Sondland had said he had been unable to retrieve his written records before he testified at a House hearing in November that he had worked with others to pressure Ukraine “at the express direction of the president.”
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. early Wednesday morning delivered an extraordinary admonishment of Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, an impeachment manager, and Pat Cipollone, the White House counsel, after the two men hurled undisguised barbs at each other.
Chief Justice Roberts urged the men to “remember that they are addressing the world’s deliberative body,” and stressed that the Senate had earned that title in part because “its members avoid speaking in a manner and using language that is not conducive to civil discourse.”
“I do think those addressing the Senate should remember where they are,” he said.
The censure came after the two men traded insults on the Senate floor.
Mr. Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, told Republican senators they showed all the signs of being ready to aid the president’s “cover up” in voting down a measure to compel Mr. Bolton to testify during the trial.
Mr. Cipollone replied with a retort of his own.
“The only one who should be embarrassed, Mr. Nadler, is you, for the way you address this body,” he said. “This is the United States Senate. You’re not in charge here.”
Mr. Nadler shot back: “The president’s counsel has no standing to talk about lying.”
Less than a day after releasing his rules proposal and drawing outrage from Democrats, Mr. McConnell submitted to the Senate a modified version with two significant changes. The most notable was a provision to automatically enter evidence collected during the House impeachment inquiry into the trial record. The earlier version of Mr. McConnell’s proposal would have put the decision of whether to admit the House evidence to a Senate vote
Mr. McConnell also gave the House impeachment managers and Mr. Trump’s defense team an additional day to argue their cases under the proposed rules the Senate began considering Tuesday afternoon. The initial proposal gave each side up to 24 hours over two days — a time frame Democrats criticized because it could push key testimony into early morning hours, when most Americans would be sleeping.
Each side still has a total of 24 hours to present, but spreading it across three days will give both legal teams more time to lay out their cases and end the days earlier.
Mr. McConnell made the changes after key Republican senators, including Susan Collins of Maine, argued that the rules for Mr. Trump’s impeachment trial should not deviate significantly from the rules used during the only modern precedent, the impeachment trial of President Bill Clinton in 1999.
Ms. Collins, a moderate Republican who is likely to face a tough re-election bid later this year, has significant sway with Mr. McConnell, as her votes could change the outcome of the trial.
Democrats cheered the changes to the trial rules but pushed for witnesses and admission of new evidence, hoping to persuade some Republicans to join them in making other changes to the proceedings that Mr. McConnell opposes.
“The real test will be if they pressure Senator McConnell to allow witnesses and documents,” Mr. Schumer said in a statement during a brief break in the trial.
Ultimately, the senators failed Mr. Schumer’s “real test,” at least for now.
While the Senate trial commenced with hours of debate over the format of Mr. Trump’s trial, the president met with world leaders at the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, where he trumpeted the strong American economy, heaping praise upon himself.
But when Democrats called for the White House counsel, Pat A. Cipollone, to turn over documents related to the Ukraine matter, the White House hit back with a sharp statement on Mr. Trump’s behalf.
“The Democrats are an utter joke — they have no case, and this latest political stunt proves it,” said Hogan Gidley, a White House spokesman. “The idea that the counsel to the president has to turn over protected documents and confidential information is ludicrous, and to imply he can’t represent the president of the United States in an impeachment proceeding is completely absurd.”
Earlier on Tuesday, when Mr. Trump was asked a question about the impeachment trial, taking place thousands of miles away, he said, “That whole thing is a hoax.”
Mr. Trump is expected to be back in Washington Wednesday evening.