How to Deal With January Crowds at the Gym
Welcome to the Running newsletter! Every Saturday morning, we email runners with news, advice and some motivation to help you get up and running. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
Dear Readers,
Happy New Year, runners! Even if you’re like me and prefer to run outside, for a lot of us, gyms are a big part of our fitness picture, and right now, the gym is very crowded.
So I have some advice about the gym, whether you’re a regular or someone going to the gym for the first time — or the first time in a long time.
For new folks: Welcome! Gyms are often big and loud and full of sweaty bodies. It’s very weird! But you’re here for a reason, and we want you to stay.
To start, don’t feel as if you have to try all the equipment, because that will only get you hurt. There’s nothing wrong with fiddling around with the weights and machines for 20 minutes or so, then calling it a day. But keep it safe. Ask if the gym has a personal training program (which is probably discounted at the start of the year) or group classes. We also have a series of guides to help you get started, including those for how to start working out, getting strong, a 9-minute strength workout and, of course, how to start running.
You don’t need to spend hundreds of dollars on new workout clothes with the latest high-tech fibers to fit in. When I started seriously running and working out, I wore all cotton and guess what? I didn’t die. While things like sweat-wicking clothes and Bluetooth headphones make my gym time a better experience, they’re not mandatory.
So wear whatever workout clothes you have, then figure out what might make your gym time more pleasant. You could even use the promise of rewarding yourself with new gear as motivation: If I stick to my gym routine for two weeks, I am going to buy a new workout top, or reusable water bottle, or whatever you think might help you out.
For my fellow gym rats: Yes, it’s crowded, and yes, new people are getting a feel for what the gym has to offer, which means they might get in your way. Gyms are intimidating for those who don’t go there often, so be kind, courteous and welcoming. Remember when you first started going? Keep that in mind these next few weeks. And if crowds really aren’t your thing, here are 5 cheapish things for a home gym, which can sub in until crowds subside (as part of my home gym, I also have a batting tee in the basement. It’s great for working out frustration and my core).
I have spent a lot of time in a lot of gyms and have seen a lot of stupid things. So here are some tips:
What tips do you have to offer new, or longtime, gym goers? Let me know: I’m on Twitter @byjenamiller.
And if you’re curious about the economics of gym-going, check out this Upshot article from 2015, “How to Make Yourself Go to the Gym.”
“Planet Money” also did a great piece in 2014 about how gyms build their business model on us not showing up. That might be the inspiration you need to prove them wrong.
Run Well and Happy New Year!
Jen A. Miller
Author, “Running: A Love Story”
Forward it to your friends, and let them know they can sign up here.