Iran Protests, Taiwan Elections, Megxit: Your Monday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Thousands of Iranians defied a heavy police presence on Sunday night in a second day of protests over their country’s initial denials that it shot down a Ukrainian jetliner, killing 176 people.
The protesters chanted “our enemy is right here,” and other slogans that suggested a shift in the focus of their ire away from the U.S., for its killing of the storied Revolutionary Guards leader Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani. The police fired tear gas, but there appeared not to be an immediate wholesale crackdown.
President Trump tweeted: “To the leaders of Iran - DO NOT KILL YOUR PROTESTERS.”
Iran's leaders: Top officials have so far failed to quell public fury with acknowledgments of responsibility. President Hassan Rouhani said the error was an “unforgivable mistake.” The general whose forces were responsible said he had wished death upon himself. Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, wrote on Twitter that the downing was “human error at a time of crisis caused by US adventurism.”
Related: Britain and Germany condemned the brief arrest of Britain’s ambassador to Tehran, who said he went to a vigil without knowing it was a protest.
In Canada: Thousands of mourners packed a Toronto memorial for the dozens of Canadian victims of the crash, voicing grief and rage.
As tensions between the U.S. and Iran appear to have settled — at least for now — a new account shows just how close the countries came to open war.
The story of what happened after the U.S. killed Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani in a targeted strike on Jan. 3, and the secret planning in the preceding months, ranks as the most perilous chapter so far in President Trump’s three years in office.
Big picture: The president’s decision to ratchet up decades of simmering conflict with Iran set off an extraordinary worldwide drama, much of which played out behind the scenes, interviews with dozens of administration officials, military officers and others show.
The latest: Mark Esper, the secretary of defense, said in a TV interview on Sunday that he never saw any specific evidence that Iran was planning an attack on four American embassies, as President Trump had claimed last week as justification for the strike on the Iranian general.
President Tsai Ing-wen urged China to resume talks with Taiwan after her landslide victory in this weekend’s elections on a platform of preserving the island’s sovereignty.
The vote — strongly influenced by sympathy for Hong Kong’s anti-mainland protest movement — confirmed a turnaround of Ms. Tsai’s political fortunes and suggested that Beijing’s pressure campaign to bring the island under its control had backfired.
The de facto U.S. ambassador to Taiwan congratulated her in person on Sunday, a signal of renewed warmth with the U.S.
China’s response: A spokesman for the department overseeing Taiwan affairs issued a statement that did not mention Ms. Tsai but warned that Beijing opposed any form of “separatist conspiracy” in Taiwan. President Xi Jinping has suggested using force, if necessary, to prevent the island from taking steps toward formal independence.
Quotable: “Taiwan must be Taiwan,” said a Tsai supporter at a rally last week.
In a televised interview with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said he would call for sweeping changes to the way his country handles fires.
But he reiterated that he would not put jobs at risk or raise taxes in the pursuit of lower carbon emissions, disappointing many who had hoped that the monthslong devastation from fires  would prompt a shift in climate policies.
Mr. Morrison called for a royal commission inquiry, which could take a year or more to conclude, that would include cyclones, drought, floods and more. He said the changing climate would require better policies for disaster management and relief.
“That is as much a climate change response as emissions reduction,” he said.
The latest: A firefighter died over the weekend in Victoria. Thanks to a break in the weather, firefighters have a chance to make progress.
Catch up: The death toll nationwide has reached 28. Millions of animals have been killed and vast tracts of land incinerated, along with several thousand homes. Here’s our major coverage.
Some Canadians have suggested Prince Harry and his wife, the former Meghan Markle, could become their king and queen. Tim Hortons, the quintessentially Canadian coffee chain, offered them “free coffee for life.” They’ve been given advice: wear flannel shirts, and take up hockey.
But in a country where support for the monarchy hovers around lukewarm, not everyone is thrilled by the news that the Duke and Duchess of Sussex may move there — especially if they have to pay for the added security.
Extradition fight: The U.S. rejected Britain’s request for the extradition of the wife of a former American diplomat who fled the country after she was involved in an accident in which a teenager, Harry Dunn, died last year.
Nissan: The former chief executive Carlos Ghosn’s flight from Japan has clouded the prospects for Greg Kelly, his chief of staff, who remains detained in the country on accusations of helping Mr. Ghosn hide his compensation.
China trade deal: The Trump administration has invited at least 200 people to a Jan. 15 ceremony for the signing of a Phase 1 trade deal. But the two countries have yet to finalize what exactly will be signed.
False nuclear alarm: Millions of Canadians were greeted by what turned out to be a false alarm on their cellphones on Sunday about an ambiguous “emergency” at one of the world’s largest nuclear power plants, just east of Toronto.
Snapshot: Above, the Taal volcano in the Philippines, which erupted on Sunday and led to mass evacuations amid fears of a “volcanic tsunami.” Ash could be seen 40 miles away near Manila’s airport, where flights were suspended.
Oscar nominations: Our awards season columnist breaks down what to expect when this year’s nods are announced today in Los Angeles (9:18 p.m. in Hong Kong).
‘The Weekly’: Helen Obando, at 16, is the youngest person ever to get a gene therapy that scientists hope will cure Sickle Cell disease. Her therapy could help determine how millions around the world are treated. Watch Mondays at 10:25 p.m. on SBS, SBS Viceland and SBS OnDemand.
What we’re listening to: This interview with the journalist Ronan Farrow on the “Armchair Expert” podcast. You’re surely familiar with the journalist’s award-winning investigation of Harvey Weinstein, but the way his life story and background contribute to his reporting adds fascinating context.
Cook: Back bean tacos with avocado and spicy onions can be mostly made days ahead, and the onions will dress up soups, salads and grilled cheese sandwiches.
Watch: Part horror, part allegory, HBO’s supernaturally tinged, 10-episode murder mystery “The Outsider” asks where we turn when logic fails.
Listen: This 2005 album from the seminal New York reggae studio Wackie. Lloyd Barnes, its 75-year-old founder and (nick)namesake, wants to ensure its spirit lives on.
Smarter Living: If you’ve been thinking about taking a cruise, between right now and March may be the best time to book. You can snap up savings and better accommodations.
A photograph that ran in The Times recently has come to symbolize the destruction wrought by the wildfires in Australia. Matthew Abbott, a photographer based there, was vacationing in the country’s southeast with his family the day he accepted an assignment from The Times and took the picture. Here is an edited excerpt from his account of how it happened.
The fire that hit Lake Conjola was one of the biggest. So I headed there on the highway.
It was mayhem. People were clearly frightened. Some had their possessions with them. Down the road, in Conjola Park, every house was burning. It was catastrophic.
In the town of Lake Conjola, there was a stretch of about four or five homes, with one engulfed in flames. The neighbors on each side were trying to hose down their own houses. They were using their shirts as masks because there was smoke everywhere.
A little after 1 p.m., a power line to the burning house fell. It was then that I saw a group of kangaroos coming up the middle of the road, obviously running from another fire. And one ran right between me and the house. I reacted and raised the camera so I could compose that one image.
I remembered thinking, “Yeah got it, good shot,” but I never allow myself to get too excited about a photo in the middle of something.
A photojournalist is trying to tell the story with pictures, and you need a series of strong images. You’re looking to document everything that’s happening. So I kept moving.