E. Jean Carroll, Who Accused Trump of Rape, Seeks His DNA in Lawsuit
The writer E. Jean Carroll, who has accused Donald J. Trump of raping her in the 1990s and is suing him for defamation, asked on Thursday that he provide a DNA sample to determine whether his genetic material is on a dress she says she had on at the time of the incident.
The request for the DNA sample was made in a letter sent to President Trump’s lawyers via email, a spokeswoman for Roberta A. Kaplan, Ms. Carroll’s lawyer, said. Ms. Kaplan asked that the sample be turned over by March 2.
Lawrence S. Rosen, a lawyer representing the president in the defamation suit filed by Ms. Carroll, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The Associated Press was the first to report that Ms. Carroll was seeking the DNA sample.
The move comes amid a trial in the United States Senate that will determine whether Mr. Trump, who was impeached by the House, will be convicted and removed from office.
In a book excerpt published last June, Ms. Carroll wrote that Mr. Trump had raped her in the late 1990s in a dressing room at Bergdorf Goodman in Manhattan. She also wrote that she had kept the black wool coat-style dress that she was wearing on the day of the alleged incident.
Mr. Trump denied the allegation, saying that he did not know Ms. Carroll, despite a photograph showing them together in the 1980s. Mr. Trump also said that Ms. Carroll had fabricated the episode to sell her book and that she was “not my type.”
Ms. Carroll sued Mr. Trump in state court in New York in November, accusing him of hurting her career and reputation in denying her claim that he had raped her.
A judge this month rejected Mr. Trump’s bid to have the suit dismissed on the basis that New York’s courts lacked jurisdiction to hear it, paving the way for discovery and depositions. Ms. Kaplan’s spokeswoman said the DNA request was a normal part of the discovery process, but that a judge might eventually have to weigh in on the matter.
In requesting the sample, Ms. Kaplan wrote that there was “unidentified male DNA present on the dress” Ms. Carroll says she was wearing at the time of the alleged attack. Ms. Carroll said she had worn the dress just once since then: when she was photographed for the cover of the New York magazine issue that included the book excerpt containing the rape accusation.
Attached to the request for the DNA sample was a laboratory report that details an examination of Ms. Carroll’s DNA; the dress and shoes she was wearing on the day in question; and the DNA of five people who “possibly came into contact with the dress at the time of the photo shoot.”
In her request, Ms. Kaplan asked officials at the lab, the Forensic Analytical Crime Lab in California, to determine whether the five people — whose names are redacted in the report — “can be eliminated as contributors to any biology foreign to E. Jean Carroll.”
The report notes that “acid phosphatase activity, a presumptive indication of the presence of semen,” was not detected on either the dress or the shoes. Male DNA was detected on the dress, the report says, mostly on the right sleeve, as well as on the left sleeve, the left and right front shoulder area and outside and inside the garment’s front skirt area.
Testing eliminated several of the people whose DNA was submitted by Ms. Kaplan as potential contributors to the genetic material found on the left and right sleeves of the dress, the report says.
Ms. Carroll is one of more than a dozen women who have accused Mr. Trump of sexual misconduct before he was president.
Mr. Trump has denied all of the accusations, saying that the women made them up.
Ms. Carroll is one of two women to sue him for defamation after making such accusations. The second, Summer Zervos, a former contestant on Mr. Trump’s television show, “The Apprentice,” has said that Mr. Trump kissed and groped her at his office in New York and at a California hotel a decade before he ran for president.
Mr. Trump has so far failed to have Ms. Zervos’s suit dismissed on the grounds that the United States Constitution insulates the president from such litigation. A New York appeals court ruled this month that the state’s highest court should determine whether Mr. Trump is entitled to the immunity he is asserting.
