Four High-Octane New Thrillers
Some people feel that the beach is the best place to read thrillers. They are wrong. The best place is in bed, in the wintertime, when the cold and dark match your mood — and when you are more susceptible to stories about creepy characters with unpleasant motivations.
Various characters (a glossy Manhattan socialite and the disaffected wife of a bro-y London businessman, for starters) go missing or turn up dead in THE EMPTY BED (Ballantine, 293 pp., $27), the second installment in Nina Sadowsky’s zippily paced “Burial Society” series. The separate strands of their stories intersect with and bounce off one another in often mysterious ways as the book travels to an array of safe houses, fancy hotel rooms and dodgy establishments on four different continents.
The connecting thread is a woman named Catherine, who has an undisclosed surname and an agency that provides high-end off-the-grid protection services to people who, for various urgent reasons, do not want to be found. She’s in Mexico City looking after some vulnerable clients. At the same time, as a favor to a powerful sometime lover famed for his business prowess and hard partying, she’s dispatched a pair of bickering yet deadly operatives to Hong Kong. Their mission: to find out what happened to a vacationing young woman named Eva Lombard, whose possibly sketchy husband says he went to bed in their hotel with an Ambien and woke up without a wife.
Why has Eva been drinking so much wine during the day, and who were those weird men who seemed to be following her? Who in this novel is actually good and who is secretly bad? Is Eva’s former boyfriend hotter than her current husband? Why was there such a high turnover rate among nannies employed by Betsy Elliott, the disappeared Park Avenue princess? All will be revealed in time.
The author is a longtime Hollywood screenwriter and producer, and at times the scenes dissolve so rapidly into each other that “The Empty Bed” can feel like a reverse-engineered action movie. But the quick cuts make the book the perfect solution to a widespread problem this time of year: seasonal short-attention-span syndrome.
Conspirators who meet secretly at a Maryland crab restaurant. Treason at the highest levels of the American government. A bunch of lazy, mean fellow interns toiling beside her in a tiny room at the White House. Twenty-four-year-old Hayley Chill, fresh out of the Army and for some reason doing lowly scut work for the executive branch of the United States government, has a lot to contend with in DEEP STATE (Emily Bestler/Atria, 281 pp., $27), a timely political thriller by Chris Hauty.
But nobody puts Hayley in a quasi-janitorial basement closet, not with her photographic memory, superb physical conditioning, relentless focus and expertise in one-to-one combat. Stumbling upon a high-level plot to assassinate the president, Richard Monroe, Hayley finds herself almost single-handedly battling, yes, perhaps you have guessed by now: the deep state. This, according to Hauty, is a “hybrid association of elements of government joined with parts of top-level finance and industry” with members that include a United States senator and the deputy director of the C.I.A.
President Monroe might remind you of someone you know (he is a populist hero who mistrusts the intelligence community, has a perverse admiration for Russia and likes a game of golf), or maybe not (he is also a major general and decorated war hero). In a world in which the implausible seems increasingly possible, it makes perfect sense that Hayley would find herself grappling with a casual lover-turned-apparent-enemy whose car is plummeting into the Potomac.
The bodies pile up, as do the wry asides about what is and what is not good for the country. Hayley is one of those preternaturally talented solo operatives skilled in every endeavor, from her physical stamina to her administrative competence to her Jason Bourne-like cool in the face of near-death experiences. She also figures in one of the more surprising double-reverse plot twists I have seen in some time.
Almost better than the plot are Hauty’s sometimes jarring, but always entertaining, asides about the fates of ancillary characters — we get to hear how some of them will die, years later — and the petty viciousness of office politics.
“If she can’t retreat back to the safety of her own office in the next few seconds,” Hauty writes of a White House aide who feels threatened by Hayley’s competence, she “feels like she might kill this vicious bitch with her bare hands.”
“This situation is insane,” notes the brother of Dr. Emma Lewis, the British neuropsychiatrist at the center of Catherine Steadman’s tricky psychological puzzle, MR. NOBODY (Ballantine, 368 pp., $27).
Yes, it is. Not only has Emma been entrusted with a mysterious patient who has completely lost his memory (or has he?), but also Emma is not her real name. Years ago, something terrible happened to her family — and now, protected by her new identity (or is she?), she has returned to her home town take on a high-profile case full of danger. The patient doesn’t know much, but he does seem to know who she is.
It helps that “Mr. Nobody,” as he is called in the news media, is handsome and sensitive and preternaturally empathetic, even though he doesn’t say anything for half the book. He is also possibly a highly trained military operative/assassin. His identity is just one of many mysteries surrounding his presence in the hospital.
It’s a joy to encounter a suspenseful book whose turns lurk, rather than lumber, around the corner. The story in “Mr. Nobody” corkscrews and somersaults. The patient remembers some things; Emma remembers some other things; not everything rings true, but it all makes a kind of warped sense. Past mysteries haunt the present in ways that are both startling and claustrophobic. The patient’s real story, when Emma finally figures it out, is even weirder than you might imagine.
Steadman will be familiar to fans of “Downton Abbey” — she is the actress who played Mabel Lane Fox, the acerbic heiress who vied with Lady Mary for the attentions of Lord Gillingham — but she’s even better at writing than acting. If her first book, “There’s Something in the Water,” was the Steadman gateway drug, then “Mr. Nobody” is the heroin that will get you hooked. Let’s hope, for purposes of withdrawal mitigation, there’s a third.
For a moment, set aside the plot of HI FIVE (Mulholland, 352 pp., $27), Joe Ide’s latest book, and savor the freshness, vividness and ingenuity of the author’s prose. “The next time anybody saw him,” Ide writes about a rival of his arms-dealing villain, “he was lying under an industrial steamroller like a poster of himself.” A gang member, buff from working out during his latest prison stay, is a “walking condominium.” A trip to the manicurist provides a woman with nails that look like “Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning had decorated 10 little Christmas trees.”
This is South Central Los Angeles, a world of warring gangs, petty criminals, guys trying to make a buck, guys trying to find romance, guys up to no good and a guy known as IQ (real name: Isaiah Quintabe), who has a knack for solving the sort of crimes that would be inconvenient to bring to the attention of the police. He was introduced three books ago by Ide, who himself grew up in South Central. Ide was in his mid-50s when he decided to draw on the rough world of his youth and mix it with his childhood love of Arthur Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes stories.
[ Ide was in his mid-50s when he decided to draw on the rough world of his youth and meld it with his childhood obsession with Arthur Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes stories. ]
Street-smart, ingenious and occasionally foolhardy, IQ finds himself presented with a case he can’t refuse. Angus, a particularly loathsome arms dealer, wants him to prove that his daughter, Christiana, did not murder a man named Tyler, despite her presence at the crime scene. A complicating factor is that she has at least five different personalities, meaning that IQ has to find a way to summon and interview all of them.
Hit men, henchmen, bagmen — they all wander in and out of a highly diverting book that crackles with life and vividness, even as it sometimes loses the plot. But it hardly matters. There are real truths hidden in the entertainment.
“What made Angus smile when he arrived for work each morning was how the guns held imaginable power,” Ide writes of his villainous arms dealer. “The power he saw in the movies and on TV; how guns controlled, persuaded, coerced, terrified, overwhelmed and saved the day,” he continues. “And the very best thing about them? The thing that gave you goose bumps and filled the empty chamber in your psyche? You didn’t have to be powerful to use them.”