12 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
MADISON CUNNINGHAM at Le Poisson Rouge (Jan. 28-29, 8 p.m.). The road from Orange County, Calif., to Los Angeles runs about 35 miles; for this singer-songwriter, that distance came to symbolize the gap between her and her dreams. In her timeless, narrative-driven folk-rock songs, Cunningham has written about the siren call that drew her from her hometown in pursuit of a music career. Cunningham’s sophomore album, “Who Are You Now,” earned her a Grammy nomination and an opening slot on Mandy Moore’s comeback tour. Ahead of those dates, she performs two sold-out nights in Manhattan. Tickets are available on the resale market.
lpr.com
DEERHOOF at Elsewhere (Jan. 28, 8 p.m.). Breezing past the quarter-century mark, this four piece from San Francisco has yet to lose the inventive instinct that fueled their early noise improvisations. Deerhoof have earned a reputation as one of indie rock’s most exciting and least predictable acts with more than a dozen albums that spill into stylistic margins, stirring strands of arena rock, avant-jazz and more into a winning blend of punkish instrumentals and chipper vocals. In honor of the band’s recent anniversary, three of their early records have received their first-ever vinyl release; expect to see copies on the merch table when the band performs in Bushwick, Brooklyn, on Tuesday.
elsewherebrooklyn.com
THE LOUD EXPERIENCE at Radio City Music Hall (Jan. 30, 8 p.m.). In the 1990s, Loud Records was a major power in a flourishing rap industry, boasting a roster that included Wu-Tang Clan, Mobb Deep and Twista. Sold to Sony in 2002, the label was later bought back and revived by its founder, Steve Rifkind, just in time to release anniversary editions of some of its biggest hits, including Big Pun’s “Capital Punishment” and Wu-Tang Clan’s debut, “Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers).” Loud is celebrating its 25th anniversary with this all-star showcase at Radio City. The lineup includes Wu-Tang and Mobb Deep, and a tribute to Big Pun, who died in 2000, by Fat Joe and an as-yet-unannounced guest.
800-745-3000, radiocity.com
JULIAN LYNCH at Trans-Pecos (Jan. 28, 8 p.m.). A hyper-productive solo artist starting around 2008, this songwriter slowed his clip considerably five years later, focusing his energy on other projects. Among them were an ethnomusicology doctorate and a new role in the indie-rock outfit Real Estate, whose lead guitar duties he assumed after Matt Mondanile was deposed in 2016. Last year, Lynch returned to his own project, releasing a new record, “Rat’s Spit,” in January. On it, Lynch displays more mainstream proclivities, through cleaner vocals and more predictable song structures, without forsaking his well-documented love of drifting instrumentals.
adhoc.fm
‘NUEVO NOISE’ at Elsewhere (Jan. 27, 7 p.m.). Designed to kick-start the careers of emerging Latinx artists, this series from the Latin culture platform Remezcla highlights three rising indie-pop singers on Monday night. Topping the bill is Loyal Lobos, the project of the Colombian-American songwriter Andrea Silva, whose recent Teddy Geiger-produced single, “Criminals,” features her dreamy vocals atop atmospheric instrumentals. Angelica Garcia, an Angeleno who writes vibrant, genre-blurring songs about the bicultural experience and is set to release her sophomore album next month, also performs. And the pop experimentalist Jackie Mendoza rounds out the lineup.
elsewherebrooklyn.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
ELLE VARNER at Chelsea Music Hall (Jan. 26, 8 p.m.). Pop music’s glossy facade tends to mask the complex business dealings that support it. When this graduate of N.Y.U.’s Clive Davis Institute went quiet after releasing a successful debut, “Perfectly Imperfect,” in 2012, it wasn’t for lack of new material; rather, her record contract was a casualty of a label merger. In July, having regained her footing in the industry, Varner released “Ellevation,” her first full-length in seven years. When she performs at this Manhattan club on Sunday, expect to hear songs from the project, which showcases her smoky vocals over laid-back R&B production, as well as older hits like “Only Wanna Give It to You.”
646-609-1344, chelseamusichall.com
OLIVIA HORN
KRIS DAVIS at the Stone (Jan. 28-Feb. 1, 8:30 p.m.). Last year was the moment Davis finally broke through, claiming her rightful place as the pianist of the moment in jazz — particularly thanks to the release of “Diatom Ribbons,” her latest album. It was a creative breakthrough but also a doubling down, throwing her particle-based, detail-oriented style of avant-garde improvising into conversation with a wildly diverse group of collaborators. Some of them will perform with her at the Stone in the coming week (including the saxophonist Tony Malaby on Tuesday and the drummer Ches Smith on Wednesday), when she will appear with a different configuration each night.
thestonenyc.com
DIZZY GILLESPIE ALL-STARS at the Blue Note (through Jan. 26, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). In the past week the jazz world has suffered two great losses with the deaths of the saxophonist and composer Jimmy Heath, 93, and the trumpeter Claudio Roditi, 73, both leaders in their field. Though decades apart, each of them owed much of their success to the mentorship of Dizzy Gillespie, and played in big bands that he led. After that storied trumpeter died, Roditi and Heath did stints with the Dizzy Gillespie All-Star band, composed of Gillespie’s former mentees and collaborators. This week’s run by the All-Stars — appearing here as an octet with a three-trumpet front line featuring Terell Stafford, Freddie Hendrix and Jeremy Pelt — is sure to feature a number of tributes to the recently departed members of the musical family.
212-475-8592, bluenote.net
STEFON HARRIS AND BLACKOUT at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture (Jan. 27, 7 p.m.). With Blackout, Harris, a virtuoso vibraphonist and marimba player, has long been proposing a kind of fusion that links contemporary jazz with R&B and hip-hop — often by way of the Caribbean, subtly. At this free performance, presented at the Schomburg by Carnegie Hall Citywide, the group will likely draw from their strong 2018 album, “Sonic Creed,” which marked their return from a nine-year hiatus. Blackout features Casey Benjamin on saxophone and vocoder, Marc Cary on piano and keyboards, Luques Curtis on bass and Terreon Gully on drums.
nypl.org/events/programs/schomburg
VIJAY IYER at Jazz Standard (Jan. 29-Feb. 1, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Over the past dozen years or so, Iyer has established himself as one of jazz’s top pianists, composers and thought leaders. He not only plays in and writes for a rich array of ensembles, he is a faculty member at Harvard and a connective thinker who collaborates fruitfully with artists across media. But at the center of it all is his lulling, reflective piano style, which is as easy to love as it is imposing and conceptually advanced. That will be on unfettered display on Wednesday, when he performs solo; from Jan. 30 to Feb. 1, he will be introducing a new trio, featuring Linda May Han Oh on bass and Tyshawn Sorey on drums.
212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
JOE LOVANO AND DAVE DOUGLAS SOUND PRINTS at the Village Vanguard (through Jan. 26, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). Two leading voices in jazz since the 1980s, the trumpeter Douglas and the saxophonist Lovano teamed up close to 10 years ago to establish this quintet, a fertile playground for their wily post-bop compositions. The group features Lawrence Fields on piano, Linda May Han Oh on bass and Joey Baron on drums.
212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com
BECCA STEVENS at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 24-25, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). In celebration of its 25th anniversary, the Jazz Gallery — which has always been an advocacy organization for New York’s young creative improvisers as much it’s simply been a jazz club — is inviting many musicians to revisit some of the works they have composed with commissions by the Gallery. This weekend, Stevens — a vocalist with a strong, dusty voice and an affinity for all sorts of jazz, folk and indie rock — will perform music from her 2017 release, “Regina,” which began with an award from the Gallery.
646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO