Indonesia Deports U.S. Journalist Jailed Over Visa Issue
BANGKOK — An American journalist who was jailed in Indonesia for allegedly violating the terms of his visa has been deported and was expected to arrive in New York on Saturday.
The journalist, Philip Jacobson, who works for the environmental news organization Mongabay, was detained in mid-December in Palangkaraya, a city in Borneo, and ordered to remain there while his case was investigated. He was later jailed for three days late last month.
Under Indonesia’s harsh immigration law, he could have faced up to five years in prison.
“It’s tragic that an American environmentalist who dedicated his energies to protecting Indonesia’s rain forests and indigenous people has been treated so poorly by the Indonesian authorities,” said Andreas Harsono, an Indonesia researcher at Human Rights Watch. “Authorities should be thanking Jacobson for his environmental work, not punishing him for it.”
Mr. Jacobson was not working as a journalist during his stay in Indonesia, said his lawyer, Aryo Nugroho. He was detained after attending a public meeting and accused of violating the terms of his business visa.
“We are relieved that Phil has finally been granted his freedom,” said Mongabay’s founder and chief executive, Rhett A. Butler. “His prolonged detention over this matter was profoundly concerning, but we are very pleased that authorities dismissed the charges and released him.”
Mr. Jacobson was deported on Friday evening, a week after the minister for political, legal, and security affairs, Mohammad Mahfud MD, intervened in his case at the request of the United States ambassador, Joseph R. Donovan.
Before his departure, immigration officials told Mr. Jacobson that he had been placed on a blacklist that barred him from returning to Indonesia, Mr. Aryo said.
Journalists who work in Indonesia are required to obtain a journalist visa, and failing to do so can be prosecuted as a crime.
But getting such a visa can be a complicated process, requiring approval from 18 representatives of 12 different ministries and various law enforcement agencies, Mr. Harsono noted. Applications are often denied or delayed indefinitely.