How Do I Rent a New York Apartment for Less Than a Year?
Q: My daughter is working toward her master’s degree in Washington, D.C. But she needs to come to New York City for four months this winter to take additional classes in the city. I am finding it difficult to find temporary housing for her. Do you have any suggestions for how I can find a suitable apartment for her during this period of time?
A: New York is a renter’s city, but finding housing for less than 12 months is challenging. In the last few years, several companies have entered the market offering more options to renters like your daughter.
Consider Leasebreak, a listing site that specializes in apartments available for 30 days to 12 months, with a mix of furnished and unfurnished units in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens. “Imagine us like StreetEasy, but we focus on the short term marketplace,” said Philip Horigan, the founder of Leasebreak.
Leasebreak does not charge prospective renters for the service, but be aware of other fees. Short-term stays are subject to state and city taxes, so ask if all fees are included in the listed rent. Brokers may charge a fee, too, which you can negotiate. And confirm whether the listed rent includes furniture.
Your daughter may find the best deal with a tenant who’s moving out because “they’re willing to negotiate to get out of that lease,” Mr. Horigan said. Sublets are available on sites like Flip, Joinery and Craigslist, where she could also search for a roommate. If she does sublet an apartment or has the lease reassigned in her name, she should fully understand the terms and her responsibilities.
She might also want to consider a social housing option, like co-living, the tech industry’s answer to the commune — as long as she doesn’t mind possibly sharing a bathroom, or even a bedroom. Companies like Common and Coliving rent rooms in furnished apartments for short stays. Or she could go the full-service route with an option like Blueground, which offers short-term rentals in 12 cities worldwide, including New York. Blueground provides furnished apartments in Manhattan luxury buildings for stays as short as 30 days. Studios start at around $2,300 a month, plus fees for cleaning, renters insurance and utilities.