We Should Have Bought the DVDs
Editors’ note: This is part of the Op-Eds From the Future series, in which science fiction authors, futurists, philosophers and scientists write Op-Eds that they imagine we might read two, 10, 50 or even 200 years from now. The challenges they predict are imaginary — for now — but their arguments illuminate the urgent questions of today and prepare us for tomorrow. The Opinion piece below is a work of fiction.
The day I subscribed to The CW Watch — the new streaming service from The CW — I had to confront the fact that I subscribe to 11 different streaming services. Between Netflix, Hulu, Amazon Prime, HBO Max, Apple TV+, Disney+, Peacock, AMC More, the Starz add-on, the Showtime add-on and now The CW Watch, I pay a grand total of $110.32 per month to watch TV. This is a far cry from the monthly $7.99 I once paid for Netflix and Netflix alone. And it was then, staring at “110.32” on the screen of my phone’s calculator, that I decided I should have just bought the DVDs. We all should have just bought the DVDs.
Streaming used to be affordable. Five years ago, “Friends,” “The Office,” “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Gossip Girl” and “Gilmore Girls” were all on Netflix. There was new content, too, which I devoured in weekend-long stretches spent on the couch, but I mostly streamed shows I had watched in their entirety several times over. Television shows became the score to which I lived my life; I played these shows on a loop in the background of my life while I cleaned my apartment, folded laundry, did my makeup or cooked dinner.
How exactly did I go from paying a monthly $7.99 to listen to a Meredith Grey monologue while I did the dishes to paying $110.32 per month for the same thing? It happened the same way Ernest Hemingway described going bankrupt in “The Sun Also Rises”: gradually and then suddenly.
The first four streaming services I subscribed to were Netflix, Hulu, Amazon Prime and HBO. This seemed logical, as Netflix and Hulu were the two biggest names in the streaming frontier, Amazon’s service also provided next-day-delivery on orders and HBO had “Game of Thrones.” I added Showtime because people on Twitter loved “Lady Lazarus,” Rachel Bloom’s surrealist musical series (very loosely) based on Sylvia Plath’s life, and what’s $5.99 per month? Then I added Starz, because people on Twitter loved the sex scenes in the gender-swapped reboot of “I Dream of Jeannie,” and what’s another $5.99 per month? Perhaps you see the pattern here: Old-school marketing techniques, like offering add-ons for seemingly discounted prices that add up quickly, were applied to a new industry, and I ate it up.
I subscribed to Apple TV+ because Jennifer Aniston, Reese Witherspoon and Steve Carell were on “The Morning Show” and I wasn’t going to not watch that. I followed Jennifer Aniston and “Friends” to HBO Max, and Steve Carell and “The Office” to Peacock. Honestly, I don’t even remember subscribing to Disney+ or AMC More — it’s all a streaming blur.
I resisted the initial allure of Baby Yoda, but I think I finally gave into Disney+ when “Grey’s Anatomy” officially landed there. As for AMC More, I must have subscribed the day after the premiere of “Birthing Bad,” the “Breaking Bad” prequel starring Allison Janney as Walter White’s complicated mother. And, finally, I subscribed to The CW Watch, but not for any new content they offered. It’s not that I dislike “Bluffington,” The CW’s dark, live-action reboot of “Doug” — it’s just that I wouldn’t pay a monthly fee to watch it. However, I have no problem paying a monthly fee to rewatch my favorite old teen dramas (“Gossip Girl,” “Gilmore Girls” and “Buffy the Vampire Slayer”). We cut off the head of cable and out sprung dozens of streaming heads.
The landscape of streaming entertainment already feels overwhelming, but it’s about to get much worse. Next year, Target’s streaming service, Bullseye, will launch; its marquee show is the long-awaited “Scissors,” a Zac Efron-led drama described as “the psycho-sexual tale of a Los Angeles-dwelling hairdresser who discovers the dark underbelly of ride-share apps.” Instagram is going the route of reality television, with plans to launch a streaming service called Influence, which will feature 24-hour reality shows starring Instagram influencers (Influence’s content has already been compared to “The Truman Show” by most publications, including The Times).
Bullseye and Influence will lack the most alluring component of other streaming services: nostalgia. This is an element that even Netflix greatly underestimated — otherwise, they would have gotten the streaming rights to “Friends” for the next century. Instead, Ted Sarandos, the chief content officer at Netflix, was out there saying, “The goal is to become HBO faster than HBO can become us.”
But HBO not only produces a roster of the best-made shows today, it’s also home to decades of culture-defining programming, from “Game of Thrones” to “Sex and the City" to “Six Feet Under.” While Netflix can produce well-made content today and tomorrow, the company is unable to travel back in time to create nostalgia shows. The irony is that Netflix introduced audiences to the joy of easily binge-watching old television shows, and this is the same joy that now helps Netflix’s competitors.
An argument could be made for canceling Netflix, as the original allure of it being a one-stop destination for nostalgia, and new content fizzled once networks realized the value of their content and moved those shows to their own streaming services. It seems that Netflix will one day be home to only their original shows, and is that worth a monthly subscription? Yes and no. For every five shows Netflix produces, one is a huge hit. And by huge hit, I mean a cultural phenomenon that is the only thing anyone will talk about for two weeks. Canceling Netflix would mean canceling the ability to talk with my friends about Ryan Murphy’s “Sandy Palms,” the satirical drama about the competitive world of sand castle building and the intimate lives of those who compete. And who wants to miss out on that conversation?
But I should cancel something. The amount I pay for streaming services is more than a cable package. But I can’t just go back to cable alone, because I wouldn’t have access to certain streaming originals that are basically a form of cultural currency. On top of that, experts predict that the last remaining cable providers will stop offering services within the next five years. I thought I had outsmarted the system, with my measly $7.99 a month. We all thought we outsmarted the system. But that system outsmarted us all in a way that’s irreversible, because we can’t go back to cable — it’s dying, we killed it — and we’re now at the mercy of the streaming services and what they choose to charge us each month.
We never outsmarted the entertainment industry when we opted for Netflix subscriptions over cable. Instead, we gave the industry a way to monetize our love of one or two television shows forever.
The CW Watch was my tipping point, not just because it was the 11th streaming service I subscribed to, but because I had signed up for the sole purpose of rewatching old content. At first, I didn’t even question the fact that I had agreed to pay money each month to view old programs that I could own outright. But I’ve since realized how financially irresponsible it is, and I’ve done the math to prove it: If I subscribe to The CW Watch for a decade, I’ll have spent $1,078 to, more or less, watch three shows I’ve seen before. On the other hand, purchasing the brand-new DVD box sets of these shows would be a grand total of $380.96, which would save me $697.04 over the next 10 years. I should just buy the DVDs and cancel The CW Watch.
This isn’t to say that everyone should buy DVD box sets and cancel all their streaming services, because there is plenty of good, new content on many of these streaming services. But if you enjoy a television show so much so that you’ll follow it to a streaming service, as I did with “Grey’s Anatomy” to Disney+, “The Office” to Peacock and “Gossip Girl” to The CW Watch, perhaps you should make the investment in owning the show outright and prevent yourself from being manipulated into paying yet another monthly streaming service bill just to watch one show.
As I sit in the apartment that I rent while I think about renting the content that I watch, I can’t help but notice that everything in our society has shifted toward renting. We rent music, work spaces, furniture, jewelry, and wedding dresses. I have a friend who rents an espresso machine. There has been a socioeconomic shift, pushing us toward renting and away from owning. I don’t know if I’ll ever own a house, but I can own my favorite television shows in their entirety, and that feels good.