Russia, Iran, McDonald’s: Your Thursday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
President Vladimir Putin of Russia on Wednesday proposed sweeping constitutional changes that could extend his hold on power indefinitely. That proposal prompted his loyal protégé, Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev, to resign — along with the rest of the government.
Mr. Putin, 67, has already been president or prime minister for 20 years, and Russia’s Constitution requires him to step down after his current term ends in 2024. Most Russians expected Mr. Putin, a former K.G.B. spy, to stay in power anyway; the question was how he would justify it.
What’s next: Mr. Medvedev’s replacement is a virtually unknown technocrat, and it’s unclear if the resignations on Wednesday signal a rift in Russia’s political elite or a coordinated plan to reshape the system. Here are six takeaways.
Quotable: “Why has this all happened in a single day?” one Russian reporter asked on Twitter. “It just means that those in Kremlin know history well: revolution has to be made swiftly, even if it’s a revolution from above.”
Go deeper: With America and Europe in tumult, Russia is punching above its weight despite a sputtering economy.
As Iran heads for a possible military escalation with the United States, the leaders of Britain, France and Germany are using risky tactics to prevent Tehran from developing a nuclear bomb, writes our chief diplomatic correspondent in Europe.
The three European countries on Tuesday formally put Iran on notice for breaching a 2015 nuclear agreement that was designed to limit Iranian enrichment of uranium. They are hoping to induce the U.S. and Iran to agree on a new deal that President Trump can call his own.
But the move has angered Tehran, which considers its breaches a justified response to sanctions that the Trump administration imposed after withdrawing from the deal. And Washington seems eager to sanction Iran even further.
What’s next: Any diplomacy will very likely be complicated by the U.S. presidential election and the political unrest that has engulfed Iran following the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, a top Iranian commander, and Tehran’s accidental downing of a Ukrainian civilian airliner.
Iraq: The United States military resumed joint operations with Iraq on Wednesday — less than two weeks after Iraq’s Parliament voted to expel all American forces from the country in the wake of the American drone strike that killed General Suleimani at the Baghdad airport.
President Trump signed an initial trade deal with China on Wednesday, bringing to a close the first chapter of a protracted trade war that has inflicted economic damage across the globe.
But critics said that many key issues had been left unresolved, and that getting China to comply could be hard. Our economics correspondent writes that the deal, which leaves a record level of tariffs in place, “looks more like a temporary cease-fire than a lasting peace.”
Details: China has agreed to buy an additional $200 billion of goods and services from the U.S. by 2021, and to provide greater protection for American technology and trade secrets. But the deal doesn’t address China’s pattern of subsidizing domestic industries, like solar energy and steel, that compete with American companies.
Why this matters: Mr. Trump’s approach may play well to voters as the president heads into a re-election campaign; the agreement all but guarantees an export boom as China commits to increasing farm and energy exports.
Great read: Here’s how one of China’s richest tycoons saved an abandoned American paper mill.
As Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, push for greater independence from the royal family, the British public’s split reaction mirrors a cultural divide over the country’s impending departure from the European Union.
Young people and liberals, who mostly voted to remain in the E.U., see Harry and Meghan as a modern couple escaping a vindictive tabloid press and a cloistered royal existence. But older people and conservatives, who make up the majority of Brexit “Leavers,” see the couple as wanting the perks of royalty without its responsibilities.
Today: Prince Harry is expected to make his last scheduled public appearance before he and Meghan transition to being part-time royals, a move that a tabloid editor termed “Megxit” as a play on Brexit.
Bells for Brexit: A campaign is underway to get Big Ben, which is under repair, to chime when the country leaves the European Union on Jan. 31. The government says that will cost about $650,000.
Mohammed bin Zayed, the enigmatic leader of the United Arab Emirates, commands a military that is better equipped and trained than any in the region apart from Israel’s. And he seems to believe that the region’s only choices are a more repressive order or a total catastrophe.
M.B.Z., as he is widely known, is a socially liberal autocrat who has meddled in Egypt, Libya, Somalia and Yemen. Some see him as a dangerous rogue actor, but others respect his intuitions about the dangers of political Islam writ large.
Climate change: Last year was the second-hottest on record, closing out the warmest decade ever, according to new research by U.S. government scientists.
Lev Parnas speaks: The Soviet-born businessman, who played a central role in the campaign to pressure Ukraine to investigate President Trump’s political rivals, said that Mr. Trump knew all about it.
Paternity leave in Japan: When a powerful politician said he would take some time off after his partner gives birth later this month, he sent ripples across social media in a country where many fathers are workaholics.
McDonald’s in England: Rutland, the last English county without the fast-food chain, ended its holdout and approved an application for a new outlet.
Snapshot: Above, Democrats from the U.S. House of Representatives carrying impeachment charges against President Trump to the U.S. Senate on Wednesday, setting in motion a trial that begins in earnest next week.
Overlooked no more: Ana Orantes Ruiz was a campaigner against domestic violence, having suffered extensive abuse at a time when there was little protection for victims. Her killing by her husband in 1997 led to major legal reforms in Spain.
What we’re answering in the form of a question: J! Archive, a fan-created compilation of more than 380,000 clues that have appeared on “Jeopardy!” After the game show’s “greatest of all time” tournament, it’s a terrific way to test your knowledge against past champions, says Richard Pérez-Peña, an editor in our London newsroom (and a former contestant himself).
Cook: Chicken and dumplings become a weeknight meal with store-bought rotisserie chicken and gnocchi.
See: A revival of the German choreographer Pina Bausch’s 1977 “Bluebeard,” a pivotal work of tanztheater, or dance theater, featuring relentless gender battles and powerful drama.
Listen: Bill Fay, an English singer and songwriter, continues a career resurgence with his latest album “Countless Branches,” after a producer named Joshua Henry tracked him down.
Smarter Living: Think you’re not creative? Maybe you just haven’t given yourself permission.
Just as tinsel and Christmas lights signal the start of festive seasons in Europe and North America, the mass delivery of potted kumquat trees is a sign that Lunar New Year is coming to East Asia.
The timing of the holiday, which typically starts on the second new moon after winter solstice, varies from year to year. But the region’s annual kumquat influx makes it hard to miss.
Kumquat trees, which have bright orange fruits and belong to the genus Fortunella, are widely seen as harbingers of good fortune. They are often displayed in homes and office lobbies, such as at The Times’s Asia headquarters in Hong Kong.
Seeing Hong Kong’s kumquats before this year’s Lunar New Year, which falls on Jan. 25, reminded your Back Story writer of living in Vietnam, where swarms of motorbike drivers deliver the trees through city streets.
The visual of moving tapestries of orange orbs resembles a citrusy variation on “The Gates,” an art installation in which Central Park in New York was filled with undulating sheets of saffron-colored fabric in 2005.