8 Things to Do With Your Kids in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER FAMILY MATINEE at New York City Center (Jan. 4, 2 p.m.). This program concludes with Alvin Ailey’s own “Revelations,” a signature work that is performed to African-American spirituals, gospel and blues, but the entire afternoon is likely to be revelatory for young audiences getting their first exposure to modern dance. Running just under two hours, including an intermission, the matinee will also feature pieces by two other powerhouse choreographers, Robert Battle (the company’s current artistic director) and Judith Jamison. Some selections draw inspiration from popular music, like Battle’s “In/Side,” danced to a Nina Simone song, and Jamison’s “A Case of You,” set to a Diana Krall cover of a Joni Mitchell tune. After the show, members of the troupe will take questions from the audience, giving preference to queries from children.
212-581-1212, alvinailey.org
ALL ABOARD WITH THOMAS & FRIENDS: ‘THOMAS CLEANS UP’ (Jan. 4-5, 9 and 11 a.m. and 1:30 and 3:30 p.m.; through Jan. 26) and the HOLIDAY TRAIN SHOW (through Jan. 26) at the New York Botanical Garden. You wouldn’t expect an old-fashioned locomotive to do anything except pollute the environment, but Thomas is no ordinary tank engine. This hero of children’s books and television is making his annual visit to the Bronx, and this time his interactive show is all about protecting natural resources. In “Thomas Cleans Up,” children in the audience can learn about sustainability by helping the engine and Driver Sam recycle a load of disposable materials; young fans can also have their pictures taken with Thomas. Tickets to the production must be bought as part of a package that includes the garden’s Holiday Train Show, a seasonal display in which model locomotives chug around more than 175 New York City landmarks that the artist Paul Busse and his team have recreated from natural materials like leaves and bark. This year’s star is a model Central Park with greenery made of mosses and holly.
718-817-8700, nybg.org
FIRST SATURDAYS FOR FAMILIES: RAISE A FLAG at the New Museum (Jan. 4, 10 a.m.-noon). A flag is a potent symbol, and the act of altering or defacing one is itself potently symbolic. In this free workshop for families with children ages 4 to 12 (those on the upper end of that range are most likely to understand the program’s themes), visitors will consider the exhibition “Hans Haacke: All Connected” and one of its works, “State of the Union” (2005). Expressing opposition to the Iraq war, the piece consists of an American flag’s field of stars, torn in half and partly crumpled on the floor. After reflecting on how artists convey their identities and convictions, participants will use fabric, markers and materials like beads, sequins and decorative paper to create and decorate personal flags that capture their own values and beliefs.
212-219-1222, newmuseum.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
SUGAR SWEET DESIGN at the Museum of Arts and Design (Jan. 5, 10 a.m.-1 p.m.). Margaret Braun gives a cup of sugar a whole new meaning. When she was artist in residence at this museum in 2015, she created an installation of 2,000 hand-wrought cups that were literally sugar, sculpted from the cake-decorating mixture known as pastillage. In this drop-in workshop, part of the Studio Sunday series for children 5 and older, Braun will teach participants how to do a really sweet project: make their own sugar cups and bowls to take home.
212-299-7777, madmuseum.org
‘SURVIVAL OF THE SLOWEST’ at the Brooklyn Children’s Museum (through Feb. 2). The triumph of a plodding species over a swifter one isn’t just the stuff of Aesop’s fables. Produced by the Canadian organization Little Ray’s Nature Centers, this exhibition demonstrates that creatures that crawl and creep sometimes win the Darwinian race, too. Consisting of 19 habitats filled with live examples — including a two-toed sloth, an African pygmy hedgehog, a blood python, a roughneck monitor and a veiled chameleon — the display teaches that slow animals sometimes gain an evolutionary advantage by conserving energy and eating infrequently. Or they may have developed a compensatory adaptation, like the rattlesnake’s fast-acting venom or the sloth’s ability to grow camouflaging algae on its fur. But what definitely attracts fleet little Homo sapiens is the opportunity to observe these animals close up. Every day, the museum hosts presentations of “The Slow Show,” in which children can meet and interact with exhibition residents like Roger, the two-toed sloth; Cobb, the blue-tongued skink; and Shuffles, the red-footed tortoise.
718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org
THREE KINGS DAY PARADE AND CELEBRATION at El Museo del Barrio (Jan. 6, 11 a.m.-2 p.m.) and EL DÍA DE LOS REYES MAGOS/THREE KINGS DAY FESTIVAL at Teatro SEA (Jan. 6, 3-5 p.m.). Although the holiday presents may all be unwrapped, the giving hasn’t ended. In fact, for those who observe the Hispanic traditions of Three Kings Day, the season’s most important gifts — those bestowed by the Magi on the infant Jesus — have yet to be acknowledged. That will happen on Monday, first in East Harlem, where El Museo starts its festivities, titled Nuestros Barrios Unidos: Celebrating Our Collective Strength, at 11 a.m. with a parade filled with music, dance, giant puppets, live camels (yes, really) and community and cultural leaders portraying the kings and other figures. While registration to join the march has now closed, all are encouraged to watch the procession, which begins at 106th Street and Park Avenue, and attend a free hourlong concert by Los Pleneros de la 21 in the museum’s theater at 1 p.m. (An online R.S.V.P. is requested.) Los Pleneros will also perform downtown, when Teatro SEA, the Latino theater for young people at the Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural and Educational Center on the Lower East Side, hosts its free revelry. Children can watch puppets and the Three Kings parade around the block and enjoy more music from the Mariachi Academy of New York. Each of the first 1,000 little visitors to arrive will also receive a gift from the costumed Magi.
212-831-7272, elmuseo.org
212-529-1545, teatrosea.org