Food Engineering
SUNDAY PUZZLE — Dear reader, there are instructions to this puzzle. Did I catch you in time? I spent, um, awhile looking for the trick in this grid before noticing the rules. I’m sure that many of you figured it out on your own, and kudos to you for that. This is an Erik Agard puzzle, so nothing’s out of bounds, and after last week’s bioengineering my poor brain saw “Engineering” again and just went haywire, I guess. I’m not going to lie, I was worried that we were going to have to combine all of the letters of all of the theme entries and anagram that whole mess into a bunch of different comestibles, which would have been bananas.
According to Will Shortz’s print introduction, Mr. Agard contributed 21 puzzles in 2019, the most from any constructor; this is already his second grid in 2020. So I think we can all agree that his puzzles aren’t rare, and they’re always well done. Speaking of the intro, let’s talk turkey:
“When this puzzle is finished, change one letter in the last word in the answer to each asterisked clue to name a food. The replacement letters, in order, will spell out an appropriate phrase.”
A natick today, at least for me, in the tiniest spot. I don’t watch “Brooklyn Nine-Nine,” so I don’t know who AMY is, and I didn’t get the “odi”/AMO opposing relationship (one of those know-it-when-you-see-it entries — think “odious” versus “amorous”). As a whole, this double Agard felt like a double Agard, slick and fizzy and blissfully low on the frustrato-meter. (Solving in one fell swoop makes me wonder what I missed, frankly. Such is life.)
70A: Hopefully your glossary of “Lisas” includes BONET, whose name runs backward in “ate no basil,” a cryptic clue in a crossword world.
113A: This is probably a fairly accessible name, but the clue is cleverly put and plays off the ingenious 8D; “Keys,” in this case, refers to ALICIA, who is hosting the Grammys on Sunday night.
3D: A timely and well-placed entry, with a fabulously dry clue. We’re actually coming to the end of the PRIMARY DEBATES; hard to believe that the first ones were last June, but here we are. (I noticed the juxtaposition here with “Donkeyish” a bit further on, ASININE, but I’m sure it’s a coincidence.)
8D: A terrific misdirect; I was taken aback by “almost a score,” thinking of the musical rather than the numerical definition. Mozart wrote 18 piano sonatas, just shy of 20. A personal favorite is 11, whose “Alla Turca” lends itself to wild feats of piano-playing hands.
52D: This was an interesting entry for me; I’m familiar with “smizing,” a Tyra Banks portmanteau, but not at all with SMAZE, a particulate-filled mash-up of smog and haze. It sounds vaguely Agardian to me, but it has been an entry in the Times puzzle since 1953 (about when the blended word was coined). Perhaps the fact that smaze has a pedigree softened me up for BLEAH — that one is a debut and all I can say is, I’ll allow it.
86D: We had this dance last weekend, obliquely, the CHA CHA; “rhumba” fit as well, and I didn’t know the provenance of either dance, despite surely seeing Cuba associated with both in past puzzles.
90D: There are competitions where you try to outeat your rivals for prizes (or free 96-ounce steak dinners), but if you’re out(side) when you eat, you’re at a PICNIC.
I guess the instructions above are all you need as an explanation for today, but that doesn’t solve the puzzle for you. There are 10 of those asterisked theme entries, ranging in difficulty, at 23-, 25-, 38-, 41-, 64-, 66-, 86-, 88-, 105- and 107-Across.
There are a couple of puns and a couple of factual questions, and one or two of them were probably in each of our wheelhouses. I know what a “histogram” is, from news graphics, so BAR GRAPHS at 38A was easy, as was RIP CURRENTS on the same row (with a few crosses).
For sports fans, LIZ CAMBAGE might have been a gimme — she hasn’t been playing for that long, but she’s dominant.
Then there are several casual phrases and references. “2 a.m. already?” TIME FLIES. “That was cheap!” WHAT A STEAL! A “Diner choice,” despite this puzzle’s edible nature, is a CORNER BOOTH, and “Something visually arresting” (which could have been “eye candy”?) is an EYE POPPER. To “duplicate” is to COPY PASTE, and to “Disappear” is to UP AND VANISH. Nothing too bad, here (dare I say “piece of cake”?).
I think my favorite pun of the day is the first clue, “Looks that can be difficult to pull off,” referring to SKINNY JEANS. I won't wear these pants because, no matter the spandex percentage, they really are torture to get on and remove. A lot of men in New York City have taken to them, though, and it’s fun to watch some of them totter around looking like uncomfortable Mick Jaggers from the waist down.
Because this is 2020, the official year of hindsight™, I feel I should have noticed the trick myself in these entries now that I know what it is. What you have to do is switch out a letter in each of the second words of these entries, to change that word into a food. You do it in order, no need to scramble any letters anywhere; write the new letter down on a napkin. So in SKINNY JEANS, JEANS becomes BEANS; B is your first letter. TIME FLIES becomes TIME FRIES, and that R goes after the B.
I do think that if each word that had to be altered was one letter away from a fruit or veggie, like CAMBAGE becoming CABBAGE, I might have figured this out. Mr. Agard threw in STEAK, he threw in BROTH, he gave us a DANISH; maybe it’s my own filtering system, but all of those examples sneaked up on me.
The end result of this swapping and scribbling? You should have B-R-E-A-K B-R-E-A-D, those  replacement letters from each theme entry, in order.
Did we all just get invited to dinner? If anyone decoded when and where, elsewhere in this grid, please let the group know
Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
What did you think?