Set Change on Capitol Hill: An Impeachment Trial to a Presidential Address
WASHINGTON — In the uncertain turmoil of American politics, there is reassurance in the predictable pomp of the State of the Union.
Iowa bungled its Democratic caucus results on Monday night. But the trusty man in the yellow rain gear was still out before dawn in Washington on Tuesday, power-washing the sidewalk outside the Capitol.
The impeachment trial of President Trump is still in its final stage ahead of the vote on Wednesday, yet most senators intend to walk across the Rotunda to the chamber of the House of Representatives on Tuesday night to hear the annual address by the defendant — as they did in 1999 during the trial of former President Bill Clinton.
The high rituals of statecraft cannot be ignored.
“Does anybody imagine that they know what the president’s going to do?” said Senator Bill Cassidy, Republican of Louisiana. “Not me!”
Senators took turns on Tuesday delivering lonely speeches to explain their upcoming votes on the impeachment of the president they would welcome in a matter of hours.
“I come to the floor this afternoon to express my profound disappointment,” said Senator Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire. “This is a sad moment in our nation’s history.”
Outside the House chambers, one of the Democratic impeachment managers, Representative Sylvia R. Garcia of Texas, tried to do a live television interview, only to be interrupted by the rattle of a cart carrying embroidered linens for the evening festivities.
In Statuary Hall, after tour groups of Navy officers in uniform and teenagers in headphones were gone for the day, crews set up hot lights and scaffolding for cameras.
Velvet ropes went up in corridors. Trash cans were emptied, the detritus of the regular day tossed to make way for the crush to come. Workers even restocked emergency escape hoods, the masks that protect against smoke and fire.
In some ways, it was business as usual. In the basement hallways of a Senate office building, a man dressed as Abraham Lincoln, top hat and all, strolled by the lunch crowd at the cafeteria. George Buss, the Lincoln look-alike, said he was en route to visit lawmakers about the Abraham Lincoln National Heritage Area.
But then there was Nigel Farage, the leader of Britain’s Brexit Party and an apparent State of the Union attendee, roaming the building. Senator Michael Bennet, Democrat of Colorado and a presidential candidate, drew a gaggle of reporters who asked not about impeachment, but about the botched Iowa caucus results.
“Wait,” asked a Senate aide grabbing utensils for lunch as she paused to look up at the cable news screens, eager for the latest updates from beyond Capitol Hill. “What’s happening with Iowa?”