What’s on TV Wednesday: ‘Party of Five’ and ‘Crashing’
PARTY OF FIVE 9 p.m. on Freeform. Almost 20 years after its original run ended, the sitcom “Party of Five” is returning to television — with a jolt of modern political weight. The series, which debuted in 1994 and ran for six seasons, centered on a group of siblings who supported themselves after their parents died in a car crash. (It didn’t always go smoothly.) The new version, helmed by the series’s original creators, departs from the original story line in a major way: This time, the family members are on their own because their parents are deported to Mexico, not killed. And one sibling is a Dreamer. “This is an opportunity to really get into the perspective of a group of people in this country that has been marginalized — and on many occasions villainized — and just show they are people, too,” Michal Zebede, a co-executive producer and writer on the series, said in a recent interview with The New York Times.
CRASHING Stream on Netflix. Phoebe Waller-Bridge was one of the big winners at the Golden Globes on Sunday night: Her series “Fleabag” took home the award for best comedy or musical series, and she won an acting award for her performance in that show. Those who have already seen “Fleabag” (available on Amazon) and want more of Waller-Bridge’s mucky humor can turn to “Crashing,” the saucy sitcom that set her television career in motion. The show is about a group of 20-somethings who live together in a derelict hospital. Written by Waller-Bridge, it’s a fast-paced grab bag of filthy jokes — and it can be watched in its entirety in under three hours.
BLACK MOTHER (2019) Stream on Criterion Channel and Topic. The filmmaker Khalik Allah trained his eye on Jamaica in this, his most recent documentary, which he told the British magazine Dazed in 2018 is “intended to show Jamaica from the inside-out.” The film offers an idiosyncratic visual collage of footage from that country — with a focus on its women, and on members of Allah’s family. “In its poetic, elliptical, concise way, this film makes a grand statement: The black mother is the mother of life itself,” Glenn Kenny wrote in his review for The Times. “And the gaze directed at the black faces and bodies in ‘Black Mother’ is not a male gaze, or a documentarian’s gaze. It is a gaze of love.”
THE ART OF SELF DEFENSE (2019) Stream on Hulu; Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. Jesse Eisenberg plays a nervous, lonely accountant who gets swept under the influence of a local sensei (Alessandro Nivola) in this dark comedy. The absurd results include Eisenberg’s character karate-chopping a rearview mirror off a pickup truck. “The vibe is less ‘Karate Kid’ than ‘Fight Club,’ minus the aggressive stylistic poses and the apocalyptic mumbo-jumbo,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The Times. He called the film, which was written and directed by Riley Stearns, “a wobbly sort-of satire.”