Bernard J. Ebbers, WorldCom Chief Jailed in Fraud, Dies at 78
Bernard J. Ebbers, who built a modest Mississippi phone company into a telecommunications giant, WorldCom, but later went to jail after its collapse in one of the nation’s largest corporate scandals, died on Sunday at his home in Brookhaven, Miss. He was 78.
His health had sharply deteriorated in recent months, his family said in a statement provided by his lawyer, Graham P. Carner, who confirmed the death. One of his daughters, Joy Ebbers Bourne, said in a court filing in October that Mr. Ebbers was “now experiencing full-blown dementia.”
Mr. Ebbers, who in 2005 was sentenced to 25 years in prison, was freed from a federal prison in Texas in December, having been granted compassionate release by a federal judge to spend his final months at home.
In what was once considered a great entrepreneurial success story, Mr. Ebbers turned his small company in Mississippi, Long Distance Discount Service, into a telecommunications juggernaut, earning him the sobriquet “the telecom cowboy.”
The company, renamed WorldCom, grew through an astonishing string of more than 40 mergers and acquisitions, including the $37 billion takeover in 1998 of MCI Communications, which was twice the size of WorldCom. At its peak in 1999, WorldCom employed 80,000 people and had a market capitalization of about $180 billion.
The company’s sudden growth presented it with an array of new challenges, including placating federal regulators, courting multinational corporate customers and serving millions of residential customers.
But Mr. Ebbers minimized the immensity of his task.
“You know, it’s not as complicated as people make it out to be,” he told The New York Times in 1998 as he sat in the wood-paneled dining room of his 130-foot yacht, Countach, while it was berthed at Hilton Head, S.C.
He said he would succeed by relying on experts. “I’m not an engineer by training; I’m not an accountant by training,” he said. “I’m the coach. I’m not the point guard who shoots the ball.”
But the company’s apparent growth turned out to be largely illusory, facilitated by accounting trickery. At his 2005 trial, held in Manhattan, former employees testified that Mr. Ebbers had urged them to inflate WorldCom’s financial results to make the company appear more profitable than it was.
The jury convicted him of securities fraud, conspiracy and filing false reports, despite his argument that he had been misled by subordinates and in the dark about any wrongdoing.
His case was one of a slew notable corporate scandals in the first half of the last decade that caught up high-ranking executives, including Jeffrey Skilling at Enron, John Rigas at Adelphia Communications and Dennis Kozlowski at Tyco International.
But Mr. Ebbers’s 25-year sentence was among the harshest ever imposed on a corporate executive.
“The problem is that Bernard Ebbers was transformed into a symbol of corporate corruption,” Reid Weingarten, one of his lawyers, said after he was sentenced.
WorldCom had $107 billion in assets when it applied for bankruptcy protection in July 2002 — the largest bankruptcy filing in United States corporate history at the time — and its rapid fall reverberated throughout the industry. Thousands of WorldCom employees lost their jobs, insurance and pensions as well as their 401(k) retirement savings when the price of the company’s stock plummeted.
The rival AT&T had laid off tens of thousands of its people in the late 1990s as it tried to chase WorldCom’s phantom profits.
In 2005, Mr. Ebbers, who was once worth $1 billion on paper, surrendered nearly all of his remaining $40 million fortune to investors who had lost billions in the bankruptcy
The WorldCom scandal was the largest accounting scandal in American history until Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi scheme, involving billions of dollars and thousands of victims, was revealed in 2008.
Bernard John Ebbers was born on Aug. 27, 1941, in Edmonton, Alberta, to John T. and Kathleen Mary (Ellen) Ebbers. His father was a traveling salesman and a mechanic, and his mother was a homemaker.
The family moved to California in the 1940s. Later, Bernie, as he was called, attended boarding school on a Navajo reservation. He ended up receiving a basketball scholarship — he was 6-foot-4 tall — to Mississippi College, a private Baptist institution in Clinton, Miss. He graduated in 1967 with a degree in physical education.
Mr. Ebbers married Linda Pigott in 1968, and they divorced in 1997. He and his second wife, Kristie Ebbers, who were married in 1999, divorced in 2008.
He is survived by four daughters, Ave Easley, Treasure Ebbers Beeson, Joy Ebbers Bourne and Faith Ebbers Gates; three brothers, John, James and Stephen; a sister, Marion Olthuis; 12 grandchildren; and one great-grandson.
Fresh out of college, Mr. Ebbers worked as a high school basketball coach and operated motels.
In 1983, the breakup of AT&T enabled thousands of competitors to start reselling long-distance telephone service to individual and business customers. This prompted Mr. Ebbers and a handful of investors to back Long Distance Discount Services, which eventually established its headquarters in Jackson, Miss.
“The only experience Bernie had before operating a long-distance company was he used the phone,” Carl J. Aycock, an early investor and WorldCom board member, said in 1997.
Mr. Ebbers became chief executive in 1985 and changed the company name to WorldCom in 1995. The company grew by buying up other companies and taking on debt. Mr. Ebbers began to borrow money from WorldCom in the late 1990s, using loans to buy more company stock.
Over the years the company increasingly took on Mr. Ebbers’s debt, and by 2002 he owed WorldCom more than $400 million. That led to an inquiry by the Securities and Exchange Commission and to Mr. Ebbers’s dismissal.
At his trial in 2005, the government argued that Mr. Ebbers had told “lie after lie after lie” to cover up the company’s mounting losses and to stave off his own financial downfall.
His lawyers argued that he had been unaware of what his subordinates were doing and that no chief financial officer at the company had ever told him that there was anything wrong.
Mr. Ebbers took the stand in his own defense, and that turned out to be a blunder. Jurors said later that he had been evasive and defensive.
The jury’s reaction was described by the father of a juror on estrong.com, a financial newsletter’s website. He said the jury had “concluded that with his personal fortune evaporating and the company he built sinking, it was inconceivable that Ebbers was not paying attention” to the details of his company’s finances.
Mr. Ebbers had been scheduled to be released from prison on July 4, 2028, but after more than 13 years of incarceration he was granted compassionate release on Dec. 21.
In a statement on Monday, Ms. Bourne, one of his daughters, said the family understood that many of the victims of her father’s scheme had opposed his early release. But, she said, she was grateful for Judge Valerie Caproni’s judgment that keeping him in prison would not bring back anyone’s investments.
She added that the Ebbers family would join a movement of people who are pressing for the compassionate release of ailing prisoners.