The Pythons Remember Terry Jones, a ‘Renaissance Comedian’
When Terry Jones went to work, he wore the robes of a Spanish inquisitor, the jacket of a French waiter and the business attire of a man selling crunchy frogs.
And long after he and the other members of Monty Python set off on separate paths, he took on new roles — as a director and historian, among others. After his death on Tuesday, many prominent admirers recalled how he had touched their lives.
“Farewell, Terry Jones. The great foot has come down to stamp on you,” wrote the actor Stephen Fry on Twitter, alluding to the cartoon foot that crashed through many Monty Python sketches. “My god what pleasure you gave, what untrammelled joy and delight.”
The director Edgar Wright began to list some of Mr. Jones’s most famous characters, like one of the Hell’s Grannies and Nigel Incubator-Jones.
The comedian John Oliver called him “the absolute best.” The actor Mark Gatiss said he was “a cornerstone of my growing up.”
Many Python fans know the lines he delivered by heart, from the sales pitch of a crunchy frog salesman (“only the finest baby frogs, dew-picked and flown from Iraq, cleansed in the finest quality spring water, lightly killed”) to a mother’s scorn after her son is mistaken for divine (“He’s not the messiah, he’s a very naughty boy”).
In his post-Python career, Mr. Jones worked on documentaries about the Middle Ages, screenwriting, children’s books and a Norse saga of his own, but it was the legacy of Monty Python that dominated tributes to him.
The living Pythons quickly spoke out after hearing the news of Mr. Jones’s death, including his close friend and frequent writing partner, Michael Palin.
“He was far more than one of the funniest writer-performers of his generation,” Mr. Palin told Britain’s Press Association. “He was the complete Renaissance comedian: writer, director, presenter, historian, brilliant children’s author, and the warmest, most wonderful company you could wish to have.”
Another former Python, Eric Idle, wrote on Twitter: “I loved him the moment I saw him onstage at the Edinburgh Festival in 1963. So many laughs, moments of total hilarity onstage and off we have all shared with him.”
Mr. Jones announced in 2016 that he had primary progressive aphasia, a neurological disease, and Mr. Idle seemed to allude to the condition. “It’s too sad if you knew him,” he said, “but if you didn’t you will always smile at the many wonderfully funny moments he gave us.”
The American member, Terry Gilliam, wrote on Twitter that Mr. Jones “was someone totally consumed with life” and “a brilliant, constantly questioning, iconoclastic, righteously argumentative and angry but outrageously funny and generous and kind human being.”
John Cleese, speaking to BBC Radio on Wednesday, said that Mr. Jones brought an “endless energy and enthusiasm” to everything he did. “He got up one day when we were shooting on the south coast,” Mr. Cleese said, “and he got excited about how green the grass was.”
He also had a confidence — to direct, to argue, to take on something new — that Mr. Cleese said he envied. “‘Life of Brian’ was his masterpiece,” he said, referring to the Python film that Mr. Jones directed alone. On Twitter, he called it “perfection.”
Mr. Jones had several parts in the film, including as a hermit whose vow of silence is cut short by a stubbed toe, and as Brian’s mother, who struggles to dismiss a crowd of adorers with a simple message: “Shove off.”
But Mr. Cleese said he would remember Mr. Jones as Mr. Creosote, a character whose titanic appetite makes him swell like a balloon. (Mr. Jones also directed the sketch, which ends poorly for his character.) “I shall think of him exploding,” Mr. Cleese said.
Though Mr. Jones and Mr. Cleese did not often write together, they shared some of the group’s most memorable sketches, like one in which Mr. Jones plays a confectioner who is delighted to sell chocolate-covered frogs.
Mr. Cleese, playing a policeman, is appalled. “Don’t you even take the bones out?”
So is Mr. Jones’s businessman. “If we took the bones out it wouldn’t be crunchy, would it?”
Mr. Jones also brought a distinct historical sensibility to the group, which was reflected in the sketches he wrote — and his future as a scholar of Chaucer and the Middle Ages. He wrote one sketch about Elizabethan pornography smugglers, and another, set during World War II, in which a joke is so funny it becomes a superweapon, banned by the Geneva Conventions, and even deadlier in German.
His style of writing — long, with visual flair and often wildly over the top — was wholly his own, Mr. Cleese said. “That was not something that any of the rest of us could do.”