Donald Trump Is a Hostage to 1979
If you’re Donald Trump, it’s always 1979. Your tan is lurid, last night’s glitter sticks to your shoe, and, still a young man, you thrill to the promise of future divorces. At the first hint of trouble, Roy Cohn is at your fingertips — and you at his. New York City, at least the parts you deserve to own (The Plaza, Studio 54, 21 Club), is a bachelor’s playpen. The rest of it? Ungovernable hellscape. The climate is doing just fine, thank you. And the president of the United States? Weak; pathetically weak.
In February 1979, a revolutionary cadre led by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini overthrew the shah of Iran. Iran was a postwar client state of the United States, and its shah had been a good friend to American banks, oil companies, construction firms and weapons suppliers. A symbol of American hegemony had turned overnight into a symbol of another kind: of hubris, intelligence failure, overreach. Predictably, international markets panicked. The dollar fell, and gasoline prices spiked by 70 percent. This came on top of previous oil shocks that raised prices by a factor of five.
As 1979 turned into an “annus horribilis,” President Jimmy Carter became a scapegoat for all the failures of a decade. The fall of Saigon, Watergate, stagflation, gas lines — a miserable era was already reaching its orgiastic summa when, in early November, a group of Iranian college students occupied the American embassy in Tehran, taking 52 Americans hostage. Over the course of their 444-day captivity, a set of images and phrases penetrated America’s conscience — burning flags, chants of “Death to America” — and sunk deep into the country’s collective psyche. The indelible images of ’79 were surely on Mr. Trump’s mind when he flabbergasted his generals and decided to eliminate Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, the commander of Iran’s clandestine operations, by a drone strike.
Only a few days before General Suleimani’s assassination, an angry mob breached Baghdad’s Green Zone and surrounded the American embassy, an act for which Mr. Trump held Iran, and by implication General Suleimani, responsible. The event seems to have triggered an episode of déjà vu in the commander in chief: The 52 Iranian sites Mr. Trump subsequently threatened to destroy represented, he said, “the 52 American hostages taken by Iran many years ago.” A hostage crisis would be intolerable for any holder of the office, but for President Trump, it bears an extra, profound significance.
As Mr. Carter became the national scapegoat, the qualities that once made him the antidote to Richard Nixon — his piety, simplicity, openness, gentleness — could now be coded as impotence. By July 1980, thanks to his perceived mishandling of the crisis, his disapproval rating hit 77 percent, higher than Nixon’s worst, in part because “Carter did not project the image of being a ‘real man,’ ” as the political scientist John M. Orman argued in “Comparing Presidential Behavior: Carter, Reagan, and the Macho Presidential Style.” Picking up on the nastier implications, various right-wingers over the years have derided Mr. Carter as “the first female president.” Even Mr. Carter himself has admitted, ruefully, “I could’ve been re-elected if I’d taken military action against Iran, shown that I was strong and resolute and, um, manly and so forth.”
Mr. Trump, I contend, carries Mr. Carter with him everywhere, as a kind of anti-self. If Mr. Carter was deliberative, Mr. Trump must be reactive; where Mr. Carter was essentially sermonic, a devotee of Reinhold Niebuhr, the great theologian of human limits, Mr. Trump is comedic-demagogic, a fan of Norman Vincent Peale, the pop-evangelist behind “positive thinking.” In picking the most extreme, unlawful, norm-violating option, and killing General Suleimani, Mr. Trump was acting according to one of his political life’s clearly discernible logics: to be the antithesis of “the first female president.”
Mr. Trump has set his life so firmly against moral development, it makes sense that he remains fixed in the past. It makes sense, too, given his personal history, that he remains fixed exactly here, in the transition from 1979 to, say, 1983 — from a weak, feminized and, in the end, reviled Jimmy Carter, to a can-do, decisive and ultimately triumphant Ronald Reagan. (This is a cartoon; but Mr. Trump thinks in cartoons.) It was this transition that helped turn “Trump into Trump” — from a comparatively minor fish in the Manhattan real estate pond into the world’s greatest popinjay.
Mr. Trump, of course, may be so impulsive as to lack a coherent self. But what reason there is to his actions as president comes, it seems to me, from his commitment to live as the anti-Carter. To enhance the theory’s traction, it will help to look at an even more specific turning point.
Mr. Carter’s so-called “malaise” speech is famously remembered as a lay sermon that fell flat, but it was a crafted performance meant to address, overtly and covertly, three political questions. First, what to do with the plurality of voters who had lost faith in American government? An alarming number of these “long-term pessimists,” as one adviser labeled them, had gravitated in the ’68 and ’72 presidential elections to George Wallace, an avowedly racist candidate. Mr. Carter’s solution, from the ’76 primaries on, was to position himself as the perpetual outsider. By running against the Washington establishment, he could appeal to cynicism while avoiding racial demagogy. True to form, Mr. Carter began his speech that night by deriding the “isolated world of Washington.”
Second, what to do about the country’s supposed epidemic of narcissism? The ’70s, recall, was the first decade of widespread divorce, and the trend brought a panic about all the newly fatherless households. What was the fate of those little boys, stranded at home with their mothers? Christopher Lasch’s 1979 best seller, “The Culture of Narcissism,” helped to popularize the notion that the country was being emasculated by divorce (and feminism, the nanny state and the helping professions).
By a quirk of fate, a young, ambitious hustler at the Democratic National Committee, Patrick Caddell, became obsessed with Mr. Lasch’s theory of narcissism. Inspired, he urged the president away from his reliance on technocratic language, and toward a greater engagement with the public mood. The word he picked out of Mr. Lasch’s prose to appeal to the president was “malaise.” Mr. Caddell eventually got his way, and in lieu of a bullet-point memorandum on import quotas, on July 15, 1979, Jimmy Carter delivered a sermon on the loss of national soul.
The key to the speech’s failure lies in its answer to the third question: What to do about the energy crisis? The postwar social contract had presupposed conditions that, in 1979, no longer existed: industrial dominance, a strong dollar, capital controls and, above all, cheap energy. With the gold standard ended in 1971 and oil no longer cheap, the central lie of the American suburbs was exposed. These were not landscapes of yeoman self-reliance, but nodes within a vast network of global interdependency.
Mr. Carter tried to shift the terms of the debate by folding the third question into the first two, then giving a single answer. If the American people were to search for meaning apart from both government and our habits of consumption, we might dial back our energy use — and solve all our problems at once. Glanced at one way, this was an appealing panacea; another way, it was quite an ask. In effect, Mr. Carter said, “I am not the problem; we are the problem.” What might count as a truism in a democracy instead sank a presidency. “I remember the exact moment I knew Ronald Reagan could beat Jimmy Carter,” Mr. Reagan’s chief pollster said years later. “The date was July 15, 1979.”
Four months later, angry students stormed the American embassy in Tehran. Their hostages were not released until Mr. Carter’s final day in office, thanks to months of slow, patient, shrewd negotiations by his deputy secretary of state, Warren Christopher. But a last-minute delay prevented Mr. Carter from playing the hero. Instead, the enduring image in the public mind is of buses carrying elated captives through the south entrance of the White House between cheering throngs, just as Mr. Reagan took office. The millstone turned to parade balloons; and Mr. Reagan all but danced into the presidency.
The Trump presidency has inverted Mr. Carter’s method: Openly court the Wallace voter, and dare moderates to abandon you; instead of curing narcissism, place it at the core of your being; drill, baby, drill. Mr. Trump is only ordinary for possessing an anti-self, around which his personality secretly coheres. But when the specter of ending up like Jimmy Carter — an effeminate president unable to decisively defeat an Iranian menace — became a live possibility, he overreacted, proving once again the man is nothing but the sum of his own insecurities.