Senator, It’s Way Beyond ‘Inappropriate’
To the Editor:
Re “Key G.O.P. Senator Will Oppose Move for New Evidence” (front page, Jan. 31):
The parsing of words by Republicans has become so creative that it’s stunning. Senator Lamar Alexander said in his statement on Thursday that President Trump’s call to the president of Ukraine was “inappropriate.”
Calling your girlfriend to tell her the sweater she wore today made her look fat — that’s “inappropriate.” A call by the president to a foreign leader to say he would withhold appropriated funds until the leader investigated his opponent — that’s “extortion.”
Chris Nicole Prince
New York
To the Editor:
Re “They Work for 3 Rival Candidates and Live Under One Roof” (news article, Jan. 21):
Your heartfelt story about three presidential campaign staffers sharing a roof in rural Iowa hints at something deeper in modern politics.
Without local leaders like Laura Hubka, who allowed the staffers to live in her home rent-free, such organizing would not be possible.
As an organizer for Barack Obama in 2008, I recall having sweet tea (really, really sweet) for the first time at the home of the Democratic Party chair in rural Mathews County, Virginia. Campaigns come and go, but the hospitality is long remembered.
Alan Kennedy
Denver
The writer is the author of “The Obama Revolution.”
To the Editor:
Re “How Does a Nation Adapt to Its Own Murder?,” by Richard Flanagan (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Jan. 25):
The life-altering fires in Australia have become a topic of conversation all over the world. Since they started, you can see the proof of climate change as the fires grow, although it seems at the same time that the leaders of Australia do not want to help themselves.
People are losing their homes and loved ones, animals are on the verge of extinction, and Australia, a once-beautiful place, is becoming another tragic story.
The rest of the world can only be of so much help. Australia’s leaders need to take responsibility and start finding ways to fix this. Climate change is not solely to blame. The blood will also be on their hands.
Kamryn Paige
Ballston Spa, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Re “The Apps Are Coming for You” and “My Cluttered Digital Life” (Sunday Review, Jan. 12):
My personal dread of a robotic future and the perpetually distracted turmoil of my digital life inspired a New Year’s resolution: to interact with humanity more often.
This meant that I ceased carrying my phone out of the apartment and actually encountered the clerks at the bank, bookstore, drugstore, grocery store and Macy’s, and started glancing at people on the bus and the subway, and even flagged down a yellow cab.
Somehow I feel that I’m living at a less depressed, deeper level of existence than before. So far, the only downside is that my friends complain that they’re unable to call when they’re late for meetings, restaurants or the theater; the upside is that they know I don’t have my phone and the pressure is on them to be on time!
Fengar Gael
New York