New in Paperback: ‘Working’ and ‘Mad, Bad, Dangerous to Know’
WORKING, by Robert A. Caro. (Vintage, $16.) In these brief personal pieces, Caro excavates his experiences creating his monumental biographies of Robert Moses and Lyndon Johnson. Our reviewer, Harold Evans, called these reminiscences “iridescent, so many brilliant refractions of light from his hard slog of discovering what life has really meant for the people in his narratives, the powerful and the powerless.”
MAD, BAD, DANGEROUS TO KNOW: The Fathers of Wilde, Yeats and Joyce, by Colm Toibin. (Scribner, $18.) Toibin assembles biographies of three Dubliners, Sir William Wilde, John B. Yeats and John Stanislaus Joyce, whose sons, born in a 30-year span, rose to the height of literary prominence. The Book Review’s Gregory Cowles termed the book “an evocative, engaging portrait.”
MOMENT OF TRUTH, by Lisa Scottoline. (Harper, $16.99.) In this seventh of Scottoline’s Rosato and Associates legal thrillers, an attorney finds his wife dead and feels compelled to protect the killer by framing himself for the murder. Just to be sure he’s convicted, he picks the pricey firm’s least experienced attorney to defend him, but he underestimates her, and she pursues theories of her own about the crime.
THE LAST TEMPTATION OF RICK PITINO: A Story of Corruption, Scandal, and the Big Business of College Basketball, by Michael Sokolove. (Penguin, $17.) Sokolove goes inside the F.B.I. investigation that brought down Pitino and exposed the hypocrisy embedded in big-time college sports. Our reviewer, Jay Jennings, called the account “a tale as fresh as the headlines.”
PEACHES GOES IT ALONE, by Frederick Seidel. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) The New York poet’s usual political and sexual themes are well represented in this slim collection, along with elegies for friends and literary colleagues who have died. The Book Review’s poetry columnist, David Orr, has described Seidel as the “darkest and strangest sort of poet.”
THE STREET, by Ann Petry. (Mariner, $15.99.) Petry’s debut novel, which was a literary event in 1946 and the first book by a black woman to sell more than a million copies, tells the story of a newly single black mother and her young son living in Harlem and struggling against racism and predation in their neglected neighborhood. “Petry will always feel on time,” The Times’s Parul Sehgal wrote. “Her kind of talent will always feel startling and sui generis.”