Variety: Split Decisions
SPLIT DECISIONS — I am trying to evangelize for all of the Variety puzzles this year, which is easy and natural for almost every challenge but this one, Split Decisions. I have nothing against Fred Piscop and his intricate, wonderful creations: I just find them hard to solve, and harder to explain how to solve. Turns out, that’s the real issue. Split Decisions puzzles are visually self-explanatory, and I don’t approach them with any special finesse or skill that I can impart to you, readers, so I’m really just the host here. Acknowledging that not only takes the pressure off, it made this solve, which has some really evocative words, much more fun.
I began at the very top center and solved in a clockwise pattern, more or less, getting tripped up at a few spots that had to be revisited. VERDANT/VERDICT jumped out and suggested ÉCLAT/EXPAT, which is right, and “trestle/thistle,” which I liked and continued the green idea suggested by VERDANT. That third pair was incorrect, though — I got DAPPLE/DAPPER and realized that the only letter that would work in this corner was “M,” as in PREMED/PALMED — so I got back on course with TREMBLE/THIMBLE.
REGATTA/REGALIA go well together, suggesting “Old Money” and English romance novels. Filling that pair in opened up the whole right portion of the puzzle. I wanted “skull” where SKINK/SKULK went, so I was happy to see it right after, using that “K,” in SKULL/SKOAL. By far the hardest pair in proximity was STYPTIC/SKEPTIC — that pair didn’t fill in until the very end, and was one of the revisited entries.
A couple of mistakes in the rest of the grid slowed my progress. I had “glued/greed” instead of the more suitable CLUED/CREED; I also had “twisted/toasted” instead of TWISTER/TOASTER.
A few really eye-catching combos: RHEA/RAGA; DUDETTE/DINETTE (do dudettes work on a rhea ranch?); and my favorite, BEELINE/BEGUINE. I read something about three weeks ago on beguinages, which were Medieval communities formed by women who lived spiritually while interacting with secular society (rather than sequestering themselves like nuns).
A couple of interesting things about “beguines,” these women who avowed poverty and self-denial. First, their movement inspired a male knockoff, the “Beghard” — these were men who professed the same beliefs but who went around seeking alms, thus inspiring the term “beggar.” Second, if you’re thinking Cole Porter, well, “beguine” is also a dance, like a rumba (not what Fred and Eleanor are doing below). Why do strict Medieval women share their name with such a thing? “Beguine,” in colloquial French, can also mean “infatuation.”
What did you think?