The Best and the Worst of the Golden Globes
It was a night of contrasts at the Golden Globes: plenty of surprise winners and upsets, but then a host so familiar he was back for a fifth time. Here is a full list of winners, and here are the evening’s highs and lows as we saw them:
The 88 voting members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association have worked hard in recent years to overcome their batty reputation, but they can still be their own worst enemies. Citing concern for the environment, they served a Globes dinner on Sunday that was 100 percent plant-based — but decorated the ballroom with flowers that arrived by jet from Ecuador and Italy.
So Ricky Gervais was only saying what many people in Hollywood were thinking when he poked fun at the association’s members, some of whom seem stuck in another era and others of whom have a language barrier. “The Hollywood Foreign Press can barely speak English, and they’ve got no idea what Twitter is, so I got offered this gig by fax,” said Gervais, who was on his fifth stint as host. He further roasted the group by saying, “The meal tonight was all vegetables, as are all of the members of the Hollywood Foreign Press.”
The association’s president, Lorenzo Soria, appeared briefly onstage and playfully swatted back. “Ricky, you keep saying this is your last year hosting,” Soria said. “For God’s sake, please put it in writing.”
It’s this kind of don’t-take-yourself-too-seriously thing that makes people forgive the group’s foibles. If only the self-important Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences would get the memo. — Brooks Barnes
We get it: you don’t care! But … don’t host, then. It is extremely allowed to not care about the Golden Globes; billions of people don’t. But maybe whoever is going to host the show should care a little? — Margaret Lyons
You don’t want the Golden Globes to confirm the conventional wisdom. You look to the show for couture-clad chaos, and to that end, the Globes threw an intriguing wrench into the works when “1917” triumphed in the best drama and best director categories.
It’s not as though this Sam Mendes World War I film lacks the right stuff to go far — I’ve pegged it as a best-picture spoiler ever since the film debuted. Still, with so much of the buzz being hogged by “The Irishman,” “Parasite” and “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood” in recent weeks, the big wins for “1917” are a welcome reminder that when it comes to the awards season, anything can happen. — Kyle Buchanan
Kate McKinnon’s introduction for Ellen DeGeneres, winner of the Carol Burnett Award for her contributions to television, was silly and substantive, and weirdly more memorable than DeGeneres’s own speech. McKinnon framed hers as a list of things DeGeneres had given her, including “two pairs of Stan Smith sneakers” and “a sense of self.”
“If I hadn’t seen her on TV, I would have thought, ‘I could never be on TV. They don’t let L.G.B.T. people on TV,’” McKinnon said. “And more than that, I would have gone on thinking that I was an alien, and that I maybe didn’t even have a right to be here. So thank you, Ellen, for giving me a shot. A shot at a good life.” McKinnon’s voice cracked, DeGeneres herself looked stunned, and the audience burst into applause. It was a good reminder that today’s brand of Nice Ellen — whatever you may think of that brand — is not the only role she has played in our culture. — Margaret Lyons
The most powerful red-carpet fashion statement at the Globes occurred in 2018 when almost all the women showed up in black gowns and tuxedo suits in solidarity with Time’s Up and #MeToo. So the fact that this year’s ceremony took place the night before the start of the trial of Harvey Weinstein, the man who arguably gave rise to the movement, added a certain scrutiny to what everyone wore.
Would they continue what they had started, and make their clothes about more than just a pretty dress? Or would they return to the status quo, when fashion choices were more about marketing and best-dressed lists? In the end, the most striking looks were gloriously, sometimes ridiculously, risky. (Sometimes they were also just ridiculous, but that was O.K.)
They included Joey King doing her best impression of living sound waves; Cate Blanchett in gold pleats and crystal bra looking like a cross between an archangel and a pole-dancing Valkyrie; and Charlize Theron in Jolly Green Giant goddess drapes over a peekaboo black corset.
And then there was Gwyneth Paltrow in a sheer high-necked ruffled mud brown tulle … knit? It was hard to tell, but the Fendi gown revealed everything from her undies to her abs and may well get her on all sorts of worst-dressed lists.
And yet, as a declaration of independence from anyone who would presume to tell her the right thing to wear — the thing that might further her career, or nab her that lucrative brand contract — it was undeniable. It’s about time. — Vanessa Friedman
It was a dry year at the Globes for films directed by or about women. But when the Hollywood Foreign Press singled out Awkwafina, the star of “The Farewell,” it was in some ways making up for its oversight. She became the first Asian-American lead actress to win a Globe (in her case it was best actress in a musical or comedy), and the movie itself was by a female filmmaker (Lulu Wang) about a Chinese-American immigrant trying to shield her grandmother (Zhao Shuzhen) from a grim diagnosis. From the stage, Awkwafina told Wang, “You gave me this chance, the chance of a lifetime, and you taught me so much.” — Nancy Coleman
After a month of withering criticism for the homogeneous choices for its Golden Globe nominees, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association started the night off right by honoring the Egyptian-American Ramy Youssef for his starring role in the Hulu show “Ramy,” which he also writes and produces. He plays a Muslim in New Jersey grappling with what his faith requires of him and how that conflicts with modern life in America.
Youssef jumped backstage to speak to the news media, saying the award was “crazy” for a show that garnered strong reviews but not a huge audience. “I was just happy they pronounced my name right,” he said.
And while Youssef didn’t address the homogeneity of the nominees, he did praise Hulu and A24 for taking a chance on his show about a Muslim family. “I wanted to lead with our problems,” he said. “To make people feel a little less lonely.”
Before Youssef won, the host Ricky Gervais had jokingly told winners to “thank your agent and your God” and leave. Was Youssef also joking when he thanked his God in his acceptance speech? No, he said, he was being serious: “I don’t always feel like I’m on the same page when it comes to jokes as Ricky. But the Epstein thing was really funny.” — Nicole Sperling
The Australian bush fires seemed to be as popular a speech theme as agents, with actors around the room reminding us about the impending dangers of climate change. The absent Russell Crowe (“The Loudest Voice”) kicked things off, accepting the award for best actor in a limited series or TV movie from afar because he needed to be with his family in Australia.
But he sent a short, incisive message, read by the presenter Jennifer Aniston, on the urgency of climate change, a sentiment echoed by his fellow Australian, Cate Blanchett. Gervais also urged viewers to “donate to Australia.” And other winners took up the cause: Patricia Arquette, who won best supporting actress in a limited series for “The Act,” said, “While I love my kids so much, I beg of us all to give them a better world,” and Joaquin Phoenix, best actor in a drama for “Joker,” urged his celebrity peers to walk the walk by cutting down on private jet trips to Palm Springs. — Lena Wilson
Williams gave a rousing speech when she won an Emmy in the fall, advocating for pay equity and work environments free from sexism and abuse. For her Golden Globes win, Williams delivered a similarly potent and personal speech, this time about reproductive rights and abortion access. She said that she wanted a life “carved with my own hand,” and that she “wouldn’t have been able to do this without employing a woman’s right to choose.” The speech was elegant and powerful; even the presenters Tiffany Haddish and Salma Hayek had to take a beat to acknowledge it before moving on with the ceremony. — Margaret Lyons
The actor Stellan Skarsgard won his supporting actor Golden Globe for a show, “Chernobyl,” about a bummer of a subject, but he didn’t give a bummer of an acceptance speech. Instead he offered a tribute that was, well, eyebrow-raising.
He started with what at first seemed like a non sequitur about the filmmaker Milos Forman. In his enthusiastic impression of the late director, Skarsgard said Forman told him, “‘Stellan, I’ve seen so many films with you, but I never remember your face!’”
Skarsgard continued, “I realized it was because I don’t have any eyebrows. Nobody could tell if I’m angry or surprised.”
He said that for “Chernobyl,” the makeup designer Daniel Parker made him a set of eyebrows, and then he stopped the speech there, raising his Golden Globe in the air as validation of the great brow job. — Mekado Murphy