Which Candidate Would You Endorse?
On Sunday, The New York Times’s editorial board will announce which Democratic candidate it’s endorsing in the 2020 presidential race. This year, the board experimented with a new level of openness — publishing transcripts of the interviews with each of the candidates that led to its decision.
Viewers will be able to watch parts of these interviews and the board’s deliberations this Sunday on an episode of “The Weekly” (on FX at 10 p.m. or Hulu at 11).
In the run-up to the announcement, we asked who you, our readers, think should lead the Democrats in 2020. Your answers were swift, and numerous.
Out of more than 19,000 responses to our (unscientific) poll, four clear front-runners emerged, one far ahead of the rest. Andrew Yang clearly owes one or two of his thousands of mentions to the Twitter savvy #YangGang, whose 20- and 30-somethings flooded our submissions with “Yang!” and “U.B.I.!” (for Universal Basic Income).
Pete Buttigieg, Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders were the others most frequently mentioned, the Midwestern (now former) mayor receiving just a few more love letters than the two senators, who were pretty much on a par, and to some readers, “interchangeable.”
“Pragmatic” was the third most popular word, after “Amy” and “Klobuchar,” in comments supporting the senior senator from Minnesota. She landed just behind Joe Biden in commendations. Both were often credited with being able to harness the power of swing voters.
And what of the underdogs, Tom Steyer and Deval Patrick? Well, their mentions may have paled in comparison with the rest, but Mr. Steyer’s appeal as a “non-politician” and Mr. Patrick’s reputation for bipartisan leadership were evident among their supporters.
Here we present a selection of your reasons for supporting each candidate involved in the board’s selection process (Tulsi Gabbard, Michael Bloomberg and Julián Castro, who has since dropped out of the running, declined the invitation to participate, and Cory Booker and Kamala Harris have also dropped out of the race). They have been edited for length and clarity.
I’m a college student from Texas who voted for Trump last cycle. Andrew Yang understands the issues we face from technology and sees the big picture, how our problems are intertwined. He is the only one promising economic change that will actually work and that will impact my generation for the long term — unlike Bernie and his minimum wage that will kill small business. Yang is the most promising chance we have ever had to end the extreme corruption that plagues our country. — Robert, 21, Denton, Tex.
Andrew Yang was the first presidential candidate I ever heard talking about reforming the intellectual infrastructure of capitalism, something that is sorely needed. Universal Basic Income, funded by a value added tax (as well as other much-needed taxes like a carbon tax) would be a game changer for a vast majority of Americans. People living in precarious economic conditions would have more security and freedom. The working and middle classes would receive more than they pay in. Wealthy spenders would pay in more than they receive. But everyone gets it, and everyone has skin in the game. It’s brilliant. — Polina, 38, California
While I’m deeply concerned about health care, immigration and student loan debt, I think partisanship is poisoning our country. Andrew Yang is not a politician. His personality is not divisive. I think he has the best chance of bringing us back together. — Angela Smith, 41, Morgantown, W.V.
He is a relatively young man with a seemingly old soul, a brilliant mind coupled with a thoughtful and even-tempered demeanor. He can, and does, call us all to serve our great nation, to mend fences, to think outside of ourselves. The time has come for a new generation of leaders, those who have the vocabulary and the desire to speak about issues like climate change, L.G.B.T.Q.+ rights and racial tensions. Younger leaders can wrap their heads around artificial intelligence, drone technology and the global marketplace in ways most of us cannot. I trust them. — Jody Danforth Root, 51, Indianapolis
As a Mexican-American mother and foster parent of young children, I find campaign messages centered on “the fight” deeply unsettling. Yes, a president must be willing to stand up for what is right even when it isn’t easy, something Pete has demonstrated through his service to our country and his work at home. At the end of the day, however, a win in November will still leave my kids sharing a country with a great many people who feel angry and abandoned. Pete has said that the primary role of a president is to call Americans to their highest values. I know some people are never going to change, but he gives me hope. — Katelyn Woods, 33, Davis, Calif.
You will receive many endorsements from Pete Buttigieg supporters, mentioning his brilliant mind, his progressive plans, his calm and steady manner. All are true. But there are two aspects of his candidacy that I think are especially important to mention: his kindness (we are past due for a president we not only admire but love) and his being gay. We had a black president, who became a beacon and a role model for black leaders around the world. Its time for a gay role model. Past time. We all deserve to be represented by someone with his personal and professional gifts, but especially our gay citizens. — Mary Finke, 76, Columbus, Ohio
She has her ducks in a row and a plan for everything. While it’s overwhelming to look at her plans, they remind me that as a woman, Warren has to have one for everything in order to be taken seriously. I like her environmental plans in particular. — Erika Purdy-Patrick, 30, Dallas
She is laser-focused on leveling what has become an impossible imbalance of capitalism. She does a surprising amount of listening and readjusting when her initial position needs modification. She has always fought for the voiceless and managed to overwhelm the old boys’ network in order to get her work done in government. She isn’t “too” anything, rather a “wonk” practicing compassionate capitalism. — Shari Doherty, 59, Mid-Hudson Valley, New York
Maybe with her, the rich won’t always take care of the rich. She came from a place where you had to worry about the next check, and hopefully she hasn’t forgotten that feeling. — Patrick, 62, Virginia
She speaks with passion about the economic disparity that is affecting the working and middle classes of America. She understands the struggle of being a student and growing up in a world that is increasingly being destroyed by climate change, endless wars, and she knows how to reinvest properly into social programs that will help increase the quality of life in America and help everyone achieve that “American dream” that’s talked about so much. Plus, she has the math to show for everything she does! — William, 19, Plano, Tex.
As a queer woman of color who for all 23 years of my life has had to watch the hours of environmental apocalypse creep up on us from the not-so-distant shadows, Bernie Sanders is far and away the only candidate who understands not just the existential crises we face, but also the only one with aggressive enough policies to kick start human redemption and mitigate what is effectively the end of the world. — Niaje Morgan, 23, Los Angeles
As an American expat having lived in Norway for the past 12 years, I see clearly that the United States government has little concern with lifting the quality of life of its citizens. In Scandinavia they treat their people as their most precious resource worthy of investment and support. In the U.S. people are treated as disposable consumers. Bernie will crush Trump. This is the fight we all want to see, and you know it! — Matthew Gray, 52, Oslo
He’s above the neoliberal politicking that has left behind the middle class, punched down on minorities and the poor and devastated our environment. The mainstream narrative is almost always against Sanders, but he consistently out-raises his opponents, has strong fervor in the base, and polls at or near the top. To write him off is a big mistake, much like writing off Trump in 2016. We need drastic action on the climate, we need drastic action on inequality. He is the only candidate that can be taken seriously on either of these counts. — Stone, 31, Chicago
Against Trump? Joe Biden. He knows and has interacted with most of the world’s leaders and would hit the ground running, reinvigorating our NATO relationships. He wouldn’t be a chest-beating, all-or-nothing president. If Warren or Sanders won the 2020 election, they would lose the next, and our nation would become like a yo-yo, going from one extreme to another. — Vicky Winteringham, 73, South Dakota
I believe that the election will turn on driving voter turnout in black communities in the Rust Belt and Latinx communities in the Sun Belt and flipping white suburbs in both regions. Sherrod Brown could have done this. Failing that, I think we’re left with Joe Biden. He’s a known quantity, and even my Trump-loving father thinks that he seems like a “good guy.” Biden is running on a platform of normalcy. — Lauren Smith, 28, New York, N.Y.
He is level headed and has foreign policy experience that the others don’t. We will need a steady hand to repair the damage to international relations done by Trump. But mostly, I think Biden can beat Trump because he won’t be labeled a socialist like Sanders and Warren, which Trump could use effectively against them. — Kathleen McBride, 70, Kansas City, Mo.
If voting with my heart: Elizabeth Warren. If voting with my head: Joe Biden. I can’t ignore the importance of the Electoral College and swing voters in key battleground states. Ms. Warren is smart and passionate. Her diagnosis of domestic problems is spot on. But I’m nervous that the boldness of her solutions won’t appeal to moderates. No one can touch Joe Biden’s expertise in international affairs, he appeals to moderates and he seems to be an ethical man. Though his age is a bit of a concern for me. — Colleen, 61, Mountain View, Calif.
Amy has the leadership experience, pragmatic approach to governing and tenacity to make things happen. Though I would like to see more overt progressive bonfires from her, it seems if we are going to attract moderate Republicans and independents, we need a more moderate candidate. — Joanne, 58, Washington, D.C.
Yes, Amy Klobuchar has stances for newsworthy policies like abortion, impeachment, clean energy and Medicare for All, but she is also one of the few to make less sexy issues part of her platform: big tech, broadband in rural America and infrastructure, which one could argue have a greater affect on day-to-day life. And I think electability is a bit of an empty term, but if you wanted to make a case for the most electable candidate, it is definitely her. The suburban white woman’s vote is something Amy could easily secure. — Hannah Spears, 23, New York, N.Y.
She knows she can win the heartland and she will stand up to Trump and defuse his vulgar coarseness with humor. She is the person to move the country forward at this time, when things are much worse than The New York Times and other so-called media are aware. You don’t have any clue what real folk are all about. We are not all from New York or Los Angeles. — William L., 74, San Antonio
He is not Washington political establishment, but he understands it. His astronomical success in finance speaks for itself. I don’t need to know what he stands for with regard to this or that. I see a man of character, a smart man who knows how to build consensus in spite of our pop culture, media-saturated, vacuous instant expectations. If Obama was “Change you can believe in,” Tom is “Change that can happen.” — Maxim Langstaff, 62,	North Carolina
Tom Steyer seems to be that non-politician, a smart businessman who is also ethical, moral and justice oriented. I wish he had run in 2016! — Katherine Davis, 64, Lawrenceville, Ga.
Tom Steyer: Not tarnished, not tired; probably an early riser. He’s an experienced decision maker. He puts his money where he feels it will do the most. He is honest and has integrity and is a hard worker. And he seeks counsel when needed. — Carolyn Proctor, 65, Washington, D.C.
I want to support Deval Patrick as he is the most rounded candidate but it seems that I would be wasting my vote to do so. I hold out hope that he will gain traction after such a late start. — Andrew S, 56, Brookline, Mass.
Deval Patrick has experience as an executive and two terms as governor of Massachusetts, the diversity of which approximates the diversity of the entire country. He leads by listening and empowering talented individuals to succeed. This quality is more important for a president than promoting a legislative agenda, which is in the realm of Congress. — Michael, 51, Concord, N.H.