6 Dance Performances to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to dance performances happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
LES BALLET AFRIK AND EPHRAT ASHERIE at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum (Jan. 13-14, 7:30 p.m.). The latest episode of the Guggenheim’s Works and Process series focuses on a newly commissioned piece driven by vogueing and house dance styles. Les Ballet Afrik, founded by the distinguished ballroom scene veteran Omari Wiles, presents excerpts from “New York Is Burning,” which commemorates the 30th anniversary of the influential documentary “Paris Is Burning,” and features Wiles’s fusion of African, Afrobeat and house moves. Additionally, the busy B-girl Ephrat Asherie will show parts of “UnderScored,” an upcoming work inspired by the wild, wonderful dancing at the Loft and the Paradise Garage, famed underground clubs of the 1970s and ’80s.
212-423-3575, worksandprocess.org
DANCE NOW at Joe’s Pub (Jan. 12, 4 p.m.). In September, this long-running festival returned to Joe’s, the comfy, intimate cabaret space, where 40 dance artists attempted to satisfy the challenge of creating a complete, compelling statement in five minutes or less on a teeny stage. The top 10 were invited back for an encore after which Nicole Vaughan-Diaz was declared the winner with her duet “A Portrait of Them,” performed with Ryan Rouland-Smith. The encore receives an encore this weekend, as Vaughan-Diaz and Rouland-Smith reprise their work along with the other finalists.
212-967-7555, joespub.com
LIVE ARTERY at New York Live Arts (through Jan. 14). This showcase of contemporary and experimental dance provides a welcome opportunity to see works you may have missed in the past year or would like to see again, as well as premieres of and excerpts from works in progress. The range of artists is eclectic: Molly Lieber and Eleanor Smith continue their intimate exploration of trauma (Saturday, 9 p.m.; Sunday, noon) while Sean Dorsey, a San Francisco-based choreographer and dancer, examines masculinity from a trans and queer perspective (Sunday, 8:30 p.m.; Monday, 8 p.m.; Tuesday, 7:30 p.m.). Other participants include Kimberly Bartosik, Jaamil Olawale Kosoko and Yanira Castro.
212-691-6500, newyorklivearts.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
GREGORY VUYANI MAQOMA at the Joyce Theater (Jan. 15, 7:30 p.m.; Jan. 16-17, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 18). After a brief, recent visit to New York for Fall for Dance, this South African choreographer returns for an evening of his own as part of Prototype, the opera-theater festival. His contribution, “Cion: Requiem of Ravel’s Boléro,” is a shadowy production set in a graveyard and inspired by the Zakes Mda novel “Cion,” which juxtaposes the story of a professional mourner from South Africa and the legacy of slavery in the United States. What qualifies this show for an opera celebration are the Isicathamiya singers, performing an a cappella style that originated among South African Zulus. The singers deliver a haunting rendition of Ravel’s illustrious score to accompany Maqoma’s grounded, gripping movement.
212-242-0800, joyce.org
DAVID NEUMANN AND MARCELLA MURRAY at Abrons Arts Center (Jan 15-18, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 25). For over three years, Neumann, a veteran director, choreographer and performer, and Murray, a young playwright, performer and puppeteer, have had an ongoing dialogue about race and life that they have shaped into “Distances Smaller Than This Are Not Confirmed.” Structured as a TV talk show, this theater piece features their raw conversation onstage, augmented by live video and bursts of dancing. They tackle their topics from a variety of perspectives and experiences in an effort to demonstrate the kind of frank and fearless, yet compassionate, interpersonal discourse that seems to be so elusive these days.
866-811-4111, abronsartscenter.org
SUGURU YAMAMOTO at Japan Society (Jan. 10-11 and 14, 7 p.m.; Jan. 12, 1 p.m.). Yamamoto, an acclaimed young Japanese playwright and director, was struggling with life in Tokyo, finding the vast metropolis a lonely place. His new work, a solo dance-play called “The Unknown Dancer in the Neighborhood,” is his way of reckoning with it. Amid the isolation and indifference, though, were surprising interactions with strangers and moments of tenderness, which add poignancy to the piece. Performed by Wataru Kitao and part of the Public Theater’s Under the Radar festival, the production combines movement, photography and projected text in Japanese, with English subtitles.
212-715-1258, japansociety.org
