Lesson of the Day: ‘Sesame Street’ Is Opening Up to Syrian Refugees
Featured Article: “‘Sesame Street’ Is Opening Up to Syrian Refugees” by Alex Carp
For over 50 years, “Sesame Street” has taught everything from the alphabet, colors and making friends to tolerance, understanding racism and divorce. Now, in partnership with the International Rescue Committee and educators in Syria, Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon, a new version of “Sesame Street” will be made available to children displaced by the war in Syria. In this lesson, you will learn more about the show using media literacy skills and apply those same skills to analyzing another children’s TV show.
Discuss with your classmates, or respond in your journal, to the following questions: Did you watch “Sesame Street” when you were a child, or have you since watched it with younger family members? What kinds of themes have you seen explored on the show? What lessons do you think children can learn from watching “Sesame Street”? Are there other children’s shows that you think teach similar or different lessons?
Watch the trailer, in Arabic, for “Ahlan Simsim,” the Syrian “Sesame Street”:
Whether or not you speak Arabic, see if you are able to answer some of these key questions of media literacy from the Center for Media Literacy:
As you read the featured article, determine whether any of your observations were intentional choices made by the show’s producers to create a certain message or deliver a particular impact.
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. How could you connect the numbers and facts in the third paragraph of the article with the push to “rethink humanitarian aid” with TV shows like “Ahlan Simsim”?
2. What is the focus and purpose of “Ahlan Simsim”? Why do experts think that focus is important?
3. What were some of the artistic decisions that Scott Cameron, an executive producer at Sesame Workshop, considered when brainstorming the show’s themes and characters?
4. The two main characters of “Ahlan Simsim” are Basma and Jad. How did the show's producers and writer describe those characters? What was behind the creators’ choices to give Jad a loose jaw or to not have Basma wear clothes?
5. Why did the show’s creators choose to have a character who had to leave his home and make new friends? What connections do they hope Syrian children can make with that storyline?
6. What body of research will “Ahlan Simsim” contribute to?
Media Literacy: What are your experiences or observations about the connection between children’s TV shows and child development? Do you think that children’s TV shows can play a positive role in emotional development? What examples from the article support your statement?
Read this quote from Mr. Cameron:
Choose a character you know from a children’s TV show. (It does not have to be a “Sesame Street” character.) Describe the character physically: What does they look like? How do they move? How do they interact with other characters? Now, think of the character’s personality traits and emotional life: How do they express themselves verbally? How does their face or tone of voice change? What are the range of emotions that they experience and express on the show?
Now that you have a list of character and personality traits, think more analytically:
