Trump’s Frightening Vision of the Presidency Is on Trial, Too
When the trial of President Trump begins, perhaps as soon as this week, the Senate will formally confront only the two questions posed by the articles of impeachment passed in the House of Representatives. Did Mr. Trump abuse the powers of his office in his interactions with Ukraine? And did he obstruct Congress’s investigation of that matter?
But the real question before the Senate is far broader than the specific scandal recounted in the articles. What is on trial, at the most basic level, is Mr. Trump’s vision of the American presidency.
It may seem to give Mr. Trump too much credit to suggest that he has a coherent vision of the presidency; he is plainly not a political theorist. But over his three years in office, and in the campaign that preceded them, he actually has put a vision of the presidency on the table. Throughout this most unusual administration, Mr. Trump has shown how he imagines the presidency should work, what he believes it is for and how he thinks its powers should be deployed. The Ukraine scandal presents a near-perfect distillation of Mr. Trump’s conception of his office — and the House’s articles of impeachment will put many of the elements of his vision before the Senate for judgment.
Fundamentally, Mr. Trump proposes that the purpose of executive power is to serve the individual interests of the president. It serves the public good only coincidentally and only when convenient.
Throughout his tenure, Mr. Trump has rarely needed to exceed the limits of executive power in order to abuse his office. Rather, he has inflicted damage again and again by personalizing and misusing powers that the presidency clearly possesses. That is what happened in the Ukraine affair, which is a scandal less because of the specific acts Mr. Trump took than because of why he took them.
As president, from the moment he swore an oath to “faithfully execute the office of the president of the United States” and to “preserve, protect and defend” the Constitution, Mr. Trump has never pretended that he serves an interest larger than his own. Rather, he boldly asserts that there is no public good distinct from his personal, political and financial interests — that what is good for him and what is good for the country are indistinguishable. This is why he seems unable to fathom that he did anything wrong in the Ukraine affair: His attempt, by leveraging military aid, to force an embattled country’s president to investigate one of Mr. Trump’s political opponents was business as usual.
This personalized vision of his office and its power is why Mr. Trump openly embraces deploying law enforcement authorities against his political enemies. Law enforcement should go after the bad guys and protect the good guys. But to Mr. Trump, the “good guys” are his friends and the “bad guys” are his enemies. In the earliest days of his administration, that view led him to ask his F.B.I. director to drop an investigation of his national security adviser and to demand that the attorney general investigate Hillary Clinton. With the Ukraine affair, the impulse is merely exported to the arena of foreign policy, where the president is even less legally constrained than he is domestically. If it is legitimate to use the awesome law enforcement powers of the American federal government to serve Mr. Trump’s interests, why shouldn’t he expect a foreign leader to do the same?
In Mr. Trump’s highly personalized presidency, foreign policy is a matter of impulse and whim, with no concern for facts or national interests. As fateful a step as the killing of an Iranian military figure can take place because the president, upset about leaks and negative press coverage, wants to look stronger than his predecessor. When President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey suggested to Mr. Trump that United States forces could withdraw from Syria, the president was happy to oblige without any significant consideration of the consequences — even announcing it on Twitter. But when the newly elected president of Ukraine requested a meeting at the White House, Mr. Trump required “a favor” first.
In every policy arena, the president’s traditional management functions — as chief executive of a giant organization — have been subsumed by Mr. Trump’s desire for self-expression and impulsive announcements of his desired outcomes. In issuing the hastily written travel ban in his very first week in office, Mr. Trump chose to push aside the departments of State, Justice, Defense and Homeland Security. Those departments then had to spend months contorting themselves to claim that a travel ban affecting Muslims was not the Muslim ban that candidate Trump had promised.
In the Ukraine affair, Mr. Trump again overrode ordinary processes. A request that a foreign country announce an investigation didn’t go through the Justice Department and the State Department; instead the president’s private emissary, Rudy Giuliani, represented the United States government. Why should Mr. Trump stick to the talking points his staff prepared for his conversation with President Volodymyr Zelensky? Why should he agree, as his own senior officials pleaded with him to do, to release military aid instead when he could hold onto the leverage a bit longer? Those officials were attempting to carry out the stated United States policy — providing Ukraine with support to hold off Russian occupation of its territory. But our national security interests were no match for the president’s own political interests.
Here’s the thing: In a very basic sense, Mr. Trump has the power to do all of this. In his efforts to pressure Ukraine, there have been few specific deployments of presidential power that exceed the formal boundaries of his authority. If he had undertaken the same acts for some public-spirited reason, each might individually be construed as a defensible exercise of presidential power. What makes this scandal a scandal is not the specific powers that he deployed but the corrupt vision of the presidency that lay beneath his use of them.
In the impeachment trial, senators will vote on whether to ratify the propriety of Mr. Trump’s behavior — and Republican senators will no doubt seek refuge in the narrowness of the articles and the constitutional technicalities of executive power. But they will also be judging the legitimacy of Mr. Trump’s vision.
That, in all likelihood, they will not vote to convict the president does not diminish the importance of the question at stake in his trial — whether it is O.K. to understand the presidency as Mr. Trump apparently does and to use the powers of the office to realize that vision.