Contemporary Brazil, Captured in Two Novels and a Journalist’s Collection
THE COLLECTOR OF LEFTOVER SOULS
Fieldnotes on Brazil’s Everyday Insurrections
By Eliane Brum
Translated by Diane Grosklaus Whitty
222 pp. Graywolf. Paper, $16.
“Whenever I visit an English-speaking country, I notice Brazil doesn’t exist for most of you,” writes Brum, one of her country’s most prominent journalists. In “The Collector of Leftover Souls,” she offers something of a corrective. The articles gathered here, all previously published in Brazilian newspapers or magazines, explore the lives of everyday people: a father burying his premature son in a cemetery of shallow paupers’ graves, gold prospectors trying their luck in the jungle, women saving up for their sons’ coffins in a favela, knowing the boys won’t make it much past 20. Brum’s bent is for deeply immersive stories of the dispossessed in which she dispenses almost entirely with the conventions of objective journalism. “Sometimes people ask me: Do you get involved with your sources?” Brum writes in her introduction. “Of course I do. We don’t enter someone else’s life with impunity.”
This kind of identification of author and subject has its risks. It can tip into folksiness (as in “Old Folks Home,” which compiles stories of residents in a state-run retirement complex) or fail to suspend our disbelief (as in “Forest of Midwives,” an unmediated account of the animist practices of Amazonian “baby catchers”). Whitty’s translation, though careful, can exacerbate this sense of dissonance; she sometimes strains to find plausible English equivalents for colloquialisms, creating jarring shifts in register. But at its best, Brum’s approach produces something truly remarkable. Stories like “João Asks Raimunda to Die With Him in Sacrifice” have the emotional precision and tragic sweep of fiction. The tale of a family expelled from a Xingu River community by a hydroelectric project, it cannot help resonating in the age of the hard-right populist President Jair Bolsonaro.
BLUE FLOWERS
By Carola Saavedra
Translated by Daniel Hahn
201 pp. Riverhead. $26.
Saavedra explores more familiar territory in her novel “Blue Flowers,” a story of obsession and the underside of desire built around two characters, a recently divorced man named Marcos and a woman known simply as A. The twist is that Marcos, a well-off businessman, comes to know A. only through reading the letters she sends to the former occupant of the apartment where he now lives. The letters chronicle A.’s torment in the aftermath of a love affair, as she reconstructs the day of their breakup, adding details with each letter and revealing, as she does so, a series of escalating harms that seem both to repel and attract her.
“Blue Flowers” isn’t quite an epistolary novel — the chapters alternate between A.’s letters and a third-person narrative of Marcos’s increasingly disordered life — but in choosing an anachronistic literary form, Saavedra seems to wish to cloak A. in the romance of the genre. Think of 18th-century heroines — “La Nouvelle Héloise” and “Letters of a Portuguese Nun,” women dying of and for love — or perhaps of “Story of O,” also conceived as a kind of letter to a lover, whose plaintive, eroticized submissiveness A. often echoes. The epistolary form enables Saavedra to introduce anonymity and missed encounters into a modern world defined by traceability and instant communication. But this raises the stakes, and, despite Hahn’s able translation, the results are mixed. While Marcos — profoundly alienated from his ex-wife and 3-year-old daughter, unwilling to rise to his girlfriend’s expectations and adrift amid the unpacked boxes that litter his apartment — is fully embodied, A. is strangely bloodless. Ultimately, A.’s story of a brutal love marked by a series of humiliations, both physical and psychological, is at once too abstract and too familiar to make Marcos’s obsession with her, or his transformation, convincing.
RESISTANCE
By Julián Fuks
Translated by Daniel Hahn
154 pp. Charco. Paper, $15.95.
Questions of betrayal and belonging also animate “Resistance,” Fuks’s fourth book, a winner of Brazil’s prestigious Jabuti prize. The novel’s narrator is, like Fuks himself, the child of leftist activists in Argentina’s Dirty War, now living in exile in São Paulo. He is one of three children, the eldest of whom is adopted, and it is the mystery of this brother’s origins that becomes the novel’s putative subject. “I chant over and over that my brother is a son and the question always springs to my lips: Whose son?”
From the beginning, the narrator worries, against all logic, that this brother may be the child of one of Argentina’s disappeared, but he never resolves this uncertainty, increasingly aware that what is at issue is his own desire for belonging. The truth of his brother’s birth is ultimately secondary to larger patterns of loss and displacement. If his parents have suffered one variety of exile, they have imposed another on their offspring. “Buenos Aires is what we all felt jettisoned from as long as they weren’t allowed back — even if some of us, my sister and I, had never set our tiny feet on its pavements. Can exile be inherited? Might we, the little ones, be as expatriate as our parents?”
The answer is, of course, yes and Fuks’s skill lies in his quiet exploration of how exclusion — willed or imposed — shapes experience within families. Like much autofiction, this slim novel, skillfully translated by Hahn, is preoccupied with the act of narration: how, even whether, to write about those we know. “I can’t decide if this is a story,” the narrator wonders early in the novel. Later, his mother, having read the book we too are reading, reflects, “You don’t lie the way writers usually lie, and yet a lie is constructed all the same.”
Lies go in all directions, as Fuks has already signaled. Speaking of his brother’s adoption he writes that “what had once been a word became unsayable” and of his parents he notes that “almost everything they tell me they contradict.” Exile is itself a kind of lie, one that requires severing the present self from the past, that past self increasingly false, buried beneath layers of retold stories. The “resistance” of the novel’s title, then, is not just literal, but also figurative — the resistance of truth, nostalgia, silence and, ultimately, narratives.