A Different Kind of Reporting Assignment: Build a Glock 19
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
It has always been legal in America for people to make their own guns.
Americans have been building personal firearms for hundreds of years, but more modern ways to make a gun have been developed. 3-D printed guns first became a reality in 2013. But it was not until last year, when the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives reported that 30 percent of the firearms seized in California were homemade, when I thought about “ghost gun” kits.
They are available online and will ship to your address. Some companies accept Bitcoin as payment. And the finished product doesn’t have a serial number.
It’s one way someone could anonymously acquire a working firearm.
On the Graphics desk at The New York Times, we’re often thinking about visually compelling ways to tell stories. We wondered how easy it was to order and assemble a gun kit. So we considered buying one for a Glock 19.
At a certain point in the assembly, we would be in possession of a handgun without a license in Manhattan, which is illegal. So we needed to find someplace else to build and test our gun. We also wanted to experience the legal framework that buyers of gun kits face.
I started exploring states with more lenient gun laws. Florida, Nevada, Pennsylvania and New Hampshire were possibilities for various reasons. Florida has a large gun manufacturing sector, for example. And Pennsylvania has seen an increase in seizures of ghost guns. But as a nonresident, I would have potentially faced some restrictions in those states. We settled on Virginia, where the lack of restrictions and proximity to Washington and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, which we wanted to interview, provided a sweet spot for the project. I had the kit shipped to a colleague who lives in that state and works out of The Times’s Washington bureau.
We decided that a video would be the best way to tell this story, which created an unanticipated problem: People seemed to be spooked that the The New York Times was filming a video about homemade guns. We struggled to find a shooting range that would let us test the weapon, and the A.T.F. denied our request for an on-camera interview.
Building the gun kit was a lot like finishing a minor home improvement project. I had to follow the instructions carefully and use the right tools. Removing too much polymer from the frame would have caused as many problems as not removing enough. When the right amount of polymer was removed, the kit became a firearm. It was tough to tell the exact moment when that happened, but it was clearly a functional weapon after I added all the internal parts.
I can see why responsible gun owners like these kits. They’re fun to build. The process was a bit more difficult than I had anticipated, mostly because I had been living in New York for almost a decade and was a little rusty with tools. Looking back on the mistakes I made, I could make another gun much faster next time.
We interviewed a former employee of the National Rifle Association who is a firearms expert; a retired A.T.F. agent; and Representative Jennifer Wexton, a Democrat from Virginia’s 10th Congressional district. Their arguments for more, or less, gun control seemed to echo conversations I had heard across the country.
We were worried about striking a balance on such a polarizing topic. After our video was published, Second Amendment advocates said we were fearmongers, while those seeking tighter restrictions said we were promoting gun kits.
One of the most surprising parts of the whole project came when we dropped off the firearm at the police station in Sterling, Va. Once an officer removed the weapon from our vehicle, I followed him to a locked area within the station where I was frisked and interviewed. Officers asked me questions while they dismantled the gun and looked for identifying features. They filed a report and performed a background check on me. Getting rid of the gun required a lot more screening than owning it.