15 Plays and Musicals to Go to in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to plays and musicals coming to New York stages and a few last-chance picks of shows that are about to close. Our reviews of open shows are at nytimes.com/reviews/theater.
‘BOB & CAROL & TED & ALICE’ at the Pershing Square Signature Center (previews start on Jan. 16; opens on Feb. 4). What the world needs now is love, sweet love, and also a musical adaptation of the 1969 Paul Mazursky film. For the New Group, Scott Elliott directs Jonathan Marc Sherman’s book about the sexual revolution and its noncombatants. The cast includes Jennifer Damiano, Ana Nogueira, Joél Pérez, Michael Zegen and Duncan Sheik, who wrote the music and lyrics.
917-935-4242, thenewgroup.org
‘THE CONFESSION OF LILY DARE’ at the Cherry Lane Theater (previews start on Jan. 11; opens on Jan. 29). Seas level, regimes fall and the writer-actor Charles Busch stays glamorous. In this new show, directed by Carl Andress and influenced by pre-code cinema, Busch plays a convent girl who becomes a madam, with a few stations of the bejeweled cross transpiring in between. With original music by Tom Judson.
212-352-3101, primarystages.org
‘THE CONVERSATIONALISTS’ at the Bushwick Starr (in previews; opens on Jan. 11). Jerome Ellis and James Harrison Monaco, childhood friends, bring their storytelling collaboration to Brooklyn. The Bushwick Starr describes the show, which traces the relationships among a Mexican pop star, a chess shop owner and a teenage boy as “a theater piece, a concert, a radio play, a night of storytelling, and a movie dreamed together.” Annie Tippe directs.
866-811-4111, thebushwickstarr.org
‘DARLING GRENADINE’ at the Roundabout Underground (previews start on Jan. 16; opens on Feb. 10). A cocktail of a musical, Daniel Zaitchik’s romantic comedy is about a guy, a girl, a friend, a dog and the ravages of addiction. Adam Kantor plays Harry, a composer, with Emily Walton as the chorus girl he loves and Jay Armstrong Johnson as a loyal friend. Michael Berresse directs.
212-719-1300, roundabouttheatre.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
‘DRACULA’ at Classic Stage Company (previews start on Jan. 14; opens on Feb. 17). What’s your type? O-positive? AB-negative? Kate Hamill’s adaptation of Bram Stoker’s novel investigates the themes of gender and sexuality that course through its heart and major arteries. With Matthew Amendt as Dracula, Kelley Curran as Mina and Hamill as the insect-munching Renfield. The play is running in repertory with “Frankenstein.”
212-677-4210, classicstage.org
‘EMOJILAND’ at the Duke on 42nd Street (previews start on Jan. 9; opens on Jan. 19). The New York Musical Festival has closed its curtains, but one of the shows it sponsored lives on. Keith Harrison and Laura Schein’s ensemble musical centers on a troupe of pixelated icons. Their existential threat? A software update. The cast includes Ann Harada, Josh Lamon, Lesli Margherita and Lucas Steele.
646-223-3010, emojiland.com
‘MEDEA’ at the BAM Harvey Theater (previews start on Jan. 12; opens on Jan. 30). The visionary writer and director Simon Stone (“The Daughter,” “Yerma”) brings a modern version of an ancient tragedy to BAM. In this study of sexual jealousy and vengeance, Rose Byrne and Bobby Cannavale star as an estranged couple who could likely benefit from some counseling. It’s a marriage story with a body count.
718-636-4100, bam.org
‘MY NAME IS LUCY BARTON’ Oklahoma (in previews; opens on Jan. 15). Elizabeth Street’s novel, conceived by Rona Munro as a solo show, arrives on Broadway via the Manhattan Theater Club. Ben Brantley, who saw Laura Linney perform in the one-hander last year, wrote, “This is writing — and acting — that grows in power without your being aware of it, and the tears it elicits feel both surprising and natural.”
212-239-6200, manhattantheatreclub.com
‘TIMON OF ATHENS’ at the Polonsky Shakespeare Center (previews start on Jan. 11; opens on Jan. 19). The extraordinary actress Kathryn Hunter returns to Theater for a New Audience in Shakespeare’s vexed and little-performed tragedy. Hunter, a veteran of gender-flipped Shakespeare, plays Timon, “who alive all living men did hate.” Polonsky’s production with Shakespeare Theater Company, in association with the Royal Shakespeare Company, is directed by Simon Godwin.
866-811-4111, tfana.org
‘FREESTYLE LOVE SUPREME’ at the Booth Theater (closes on Jan. 12). This improvised hip-hop comedy drops the mic. Created by Thomas Kail, Lin-Manuel Miranda and Anthony Veneziale, the show uses audience suggestions to create a different concert each night. Ben Brantley wrote that it “suggests that there’s no feeling, thought or experience so anxious or so random that it can’t be translated into infectious, neon-bright rhythms.”
212-239-6200, freestylelovesupreme.com
‘GREATER CLEMENTS’ at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center Theater (closes on Jan. 19). Samuel D. Hunter’s community tragedy, set in a small, industry-starved Idaho town, goes down the silver mines for the last time. Jesse Green compared it to a mine elevator: “creaky and skeletal but with intermittent access to wonderful things.” He added, “If you are looking to cry, as I always am, ‘Greater Clements’ will give you more than one reason to do so.”
212-239-6200, lct.org
‘OKLAHOMA!’ at Circle in the Square (closes on Jan. 19). The wind will whistle down Broadway for just a few more performances as Daniel Fish’s audacious version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein classic comes to a close. “This isn’t an act of plunder,” Ben Brantley wrote, “but of reclamation. And a cozy old friend starts to seem like a figure of disturbing — and exciting — depth and complexity.”
212-239-6200, oklahomabroadway.com
‘ONE IN TWO’ at the Pershing Square Signature Center (closes on Jan. 12). Donja R. Love’s new drama about queer black men living with H.I.V. ends its run. Laura Collins-Hughes wrote that because of this New Group production by Stevie Walker-Webb, the play “has entered the world in a state of quiet glory, equal parts laughter and pain.”
917-935-4242, thenewgroup.org
‘SLAVE PLAY’ at the John Golden Theater (closes on Jan. 19). A work that has changed the Broadway conversation around race, sex, audiences, ticket prices and even talkbacks, Jeremy O. Harris’s barbed comedy ends its run. Jesse Green wrote that in its depiction of three interracial couples, Robert O’Hara’s production “lets us all see ourselves in the muddle that is race in America now.”
212-947-8844, slaveplaybroadway.com
‘THE SOUND INSIDE’ at Studio 54 (closes on Jan. 12). Adam Rapp’s twisty drama about a creative writing professor (Mary-Louise Parker) and her student (Will Hochman) closes its books. Jesse Green, who had also seen the play at the Williamstown Theater Festival, described David Cromer’s production as “even more resonant on Broadway: a tragedy about fiction, both the kind we read and the kind we live.”
212-239-6200, lct.org