Key Question in Weinstein Trial: ‘Do You Believe the Women?’
One woman accused Harvey Weinstein of forcing oral sex on her in his Manhattan apartment, even as she protested. She continued to see him, send friendly messages and seek work from him.
A second woman said Mr. Weinstein, the one-time Hollywood titan, raped her in a Midtown Manhattan hotel room. She maintained a sexual relationship with him for years, she said, to save her career.
Two other women accusing him of sexual assault were waitresses who wanted to become actresses. One said she agreed to meet Mr. Weinstein about a film role after he had masturbated in front of her in a club. The other said she met him to talk about a script after he had reached up her skirt and touched her genitals during their first encounter.
The prosecution rested its case against Mr. Weinstein on Thursday after graphic, first-person testimony from six women who said the producer had sexually assaulted them.
But the district attorney’s office has to overcome a significant hurdle: The two main witnesses against Mr. Weinstein maintained friendships with him after the alleged assaults, even having some consensual sexual encounters. Other accusers ignored his sexual misconduct and saw him again in the hope of getting work.
That places a burden on prosecutors. They must explain to the jury of seven men and five women why some of the women continued to see him.
“It’s confusing for the jury that they’re being told they” — Mr. Weinstein’s accusers — “were devastated by the crime and then they ask, ‘When do I get to see you next?’” said Matthew Galluzzo, a New York defense lawyer and a former Manhattan sex crimes prosecutor.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers are calling several witnesses to the stand to bolster his position that the relationships were consensual and in some cases transactional. Some of the women, the lawyers said, wanted to advance their own careers and use Mr. Weinstein to do so.
“You’ll see they had a relationship,” Damon Cheronis, a defense lawyer, said in his opening statement. “You will see that sex was involved.”
The trial is largely seen as a watershed moment for the #MeToo movement, a rebuke of decades of sexual harassment and abuse by men against women in the workplace, focusing attention on complex issues of consent and power dynamics.
For weeks, Mr. Weinstein, who is 67 and recently had back surgery, has sat at the defense table, seemingly frail, slightly hunched and worn. He has used a walker to get around.
It is an image that prosecutors have sought to counter. Mr. Weinstein, they told jurors, was a giant in Hollywood, known for Oscar-winning films including “Shakespeare in Love” and “Pulp Fiction,” who had used his influence and physicality to overpower and coerce women into sexual encounters.
Two of the women who testified against Mr. Weinstein — Annabella Sciorra and Lauren Young — never contacted him again. Ms. Sciorra, an actress, said Mr. Weinstein barged into her own New York City apartment and raped her in the early 1990s. Ms. Young, a model, said Mr. Weinstein groped her breast in a hotel bathroom in Los Angeles while masturbating.
At the heart of the criminal indictment are allegations made by two women: Miriam Haley, a former production assistant who said the producer forced oral sex on her inside of his home in 2006, and Jessica Mann, a former actress who accused him of raping her in a Midtown Manhattan hotel in 2013.
Mr. Weinstein has pleaded not guilty in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to five felony counts including criminal sexual assault, rape and predatory sexual assault.
Testimony from Ms. Sciorra, known for her work in “The Sopranos,” is meant to support the predatory sexual assault charge, which requires that prosecutors show that the movie mogul committed a serious sex crime against at least two women. Mr. Weinstein faces up to life in prison if convicted on that charge.
Ms. Young and two other women, Dawn Dunning and Tarale Wulff, recounted for the jury their encounters with Mr. Weinstein under a state law that allows testimony about “prior bad acts” to demonstrate a pattern of behavior. Prosecutors have said that Mr. Weinstein tricked young women into meeting with him under the impression he intended to help their careers.
The Manhattan district attorney’s case rests almost entirely on the women’s testimony. None of them reported the attacks to the police at the time, and there is little physical or forensic evidence to support their claims, beyond photographs of the defendant that are being used to corroborate their descriptions of his body.
It is a case, said Stephen Gillers, a New York University law professor, that turns on a single question: “Do you believe the women?”
Defense lawyers used their cross-examinations to suggest that the witnesses had consented. On Thursday, the defense called Paul Feldsher, a former film producer, who recalled Ms. Sciorra telling him in the early 1990s on a walk in Manhattan that she had awkward sex with Mr. Weinstein but not that she had been raped.
“I remember Annabella saying to me that she’d done this crazy thing with Harvey,” he said. Then he added, “My understanding was that she fooled around with him.”
For their part, prosecutors are banking that the women’s accounts will support one another and establish a pattern of predatory behavior. A similar tactic proved effective in Bill Cosby’s second sexual assault trial, in which he was convicted after five women testified.
“It may be easy to be skeptical of one or two reports,” said Suzanne Goldberg, a Columbia University law professor, “but as the reports pile up, it becomes hard for a thinking person to think that all of these reporters are lying.”
From the start, prosecutors have tried to portray Mr. Weinstein as a calculating predator who groomed and targeted women he believed he could easily manipulate.
His accusers, they say, fit that profile: Ms. Mann was a naïve, aspiring actress who fled an abusive home on a dairy farm in Washington State, and Ms. Haley was a financially struggling production assistant from Sweden who had a tough childhood.
Mr. Weinstein, who had walked red carpets around the world and rubbed elbows with Bill and Hillary Clinton, overawed his accusers, prosecutors said. Most of the women were not famous — with the exception of Ms. Sciorra — or financially secure, and they had few or no ties to their families.
“The power and balance he deviously exploited was not just physical, it was also professional and profoundly psychological,” one of the prosecutors, Meghan Hast, said in her opening statement. “You will see how that dynamic often causes victims to act in ways a layperson might not generally expect.”
The women’s accounts shared several similarities: Mr. Weinstein allegedly lured them to his home or a hotel room with the promise of an acting role or a job, then cornered them into a bedroom or bathroom, demanded that they undress — even as they protested — and coerced them into a sexual act, using physical and verbal intimidation.
“I had this dynamic with Harvey where I felt like I always had to obey and jump,” Ms. Mann said on Monday during cross-examination. Under earlier questioning, she told his lawyers, “When he heard the word ‘no’ and you can’t give him what he wanted — that is when this monster would come out.”
Ms. Mann testified that she had maintained a yearslong relationship with Mr. Weinstein after he had forced oral sex on her during a meeting at a hotel in Beverly Hills, Calif. She said she had engaged in a number of consensual sexual encounters with him before and after the alleged rape in March 2013 at the Doubletree Hotel in Midtown Manhattan until as late as 2016.
“I know the history of my relationship with him,” she said this week. “I know it is complicated and different, but it does not change the fact that he raped me.”
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers have noted that Ms. Mann had sent dozens of friendly emails to him, which, according to the lawyers, suggest that the two were in a romantic relationship and that Ms. Mann’s allegation that she was raped is false. In one email, she told him that he should meet her mother. In a 2014 email to a former boyfriend, Ms. Mann wrote that Mr. Weinstein had given her “all of the validation she had ever needed.”
Similarly, Ms. Haley, who legally changed her name from Mimi Haleyi, said she, too, had tried to maintain “a professional connection” with Mr. Weinstein. She said she continued to share scripts, pitch projects, seek work and accept tickets to movie premieres after the producer had forced oral sex on her. His lawyers suggested she was using Mr. Weinstein.
A forensic psychiatrist, Barbara Ziv, testified for the prosecution that it is common for victims of a sexual assault to not report the crime to law enforcement and to remain in contact with their attacker. In some cases, Dr. Ziv said, victims worry that their assaulter might ruin their reputation or job. Sometimes the victim maintains a relationship with the perpetrator because they have a connection to the person.
“Those women do not always leave,” Dr. Ziv said. “In fact, they frequently do not leave and they stay for a long period of time, and they may think about it but they don’t do it.”