Writing a Book Is a Solitary Endeavor. Publishing One Is a Group Effort.
BEHIND THE SCENES WITH EDITORS “The first best seller I had was ‘The Power of Habit,’ by Charles Duhigg. It was also the first book I signed up, so it had special significance. That moment, every Wednesday afternoon, when the list shows up in our inboxes, is always fun — tense, too. There’s this moment of quiet as the attachment opens, and then you hear screams and claps and hell yesses echoing over the floor. ‘The Power of Habit’ had two publicists, a production editor, several marketers and designers, a serial rights person and a sales force that had been working for months to make it a success. It’s rare that a book hitting the list is a total surprise, but there are nail-biters and books that hit higher than we expected and that’s a beautiful thing … but not as beautiful as making that call to an author who has worked so hard to make her book a reality and telling her that she is an official NYT best seller. That moment never gets old; it’s impossible to be jaded about it. Sometimes they get quiet, sometimes they cry, sometimes they yell OH MY GOD. All of the above are appropriate.” — Andy Ward, publisher, Random House
“When I told Susan Jane Gilman that ‘Hypocrite in a Pouffy White Dress’ was a best seller, she was speechless and Susan is never speechless. Her first call was to her high school English teacher, Frank McCourt.” — Amy Einhorn, publisher, Henry Holt
“I’m lucky to publish John Kenney, who wrote a collection of fun, real poems about beleaguered married people. This was a fun side project for both of us, so when the best-seller list came out after the book had been out for a week, it didn’t occur to me to check it. A few hollers down the hall told me something was up. Turned out, ‘Love Poems for Married People’ was on that list! When we called John, the phone rang, and then we heard, ‘This voice mail box is full and cannot accept messages.’ When I finally reached John, he was delighted and bewildered. He said, ‘I was at the dentist!’” — Sally Kim, editor in chief, Putnam
“I was with Elizabeth Kostova on a tour stop in Chicago when Michael Pietsch called to tell me ‘The Historian’ was No. 1 on the list and I think she and I were both in shock — he said later that my reaction seemed a little subdued. Now that I’ve been able to make that same Wednesday night call myself, I know it’s one of the job’s best perks: Whether they’re surprised or not, authors are definitely glad to hear the news.” —Reagan Arthur, publisher, Little, Brown