Lincoln Center’s Next Season: ‘Elektra,’ Cleveland, Rouse
Esa-Pekka Salonen will lead a concert version of Strauss’s “Elektra.” Franz Welser-Möst will conduct the Cleveland Orchestra in Mozart and Morton Feldman. Louis Langrée and the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra will give the first New York performance of Christopher Rouse’s Symphony No. 6, which they premiered last year, shortly after its composer’s death.
A slew of visiting orchestras and the Rouse symphony — which Joshua Barone described in The New York Times as a “haunting and profound farewell” — are among the highlights of next season’s Great Performers series at Lincoln Center.
The 2020-21 series, which was announced on Thursday, will also feature a variety of smaller ensembles, chamber music concerts and more intimate recitals. There will be several free concerts in the center’s David Rubenstein Atrium, including the pianist Francesco Tristano playing Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations alongside projections of a digital city being drawn in real time.
The dauntless soprano Barbara Hannigan will star alongside the pianists Katia and Marielle Labèque in the New York premiere of “Supernova,” a staged exploration of nine centuries of song, directed by Netia Jones and featuring music by Hildegard von Bingen, Barbara Strozzi, Francesca Caccini, David Chalmin and Bryce Dessner.
A hearty helping of period-instrument ensembles includes Philippe Herreweghe and the Collegium Vocale Gent, performing Bach’s B-minor Mass; William Christie and Les Arts Florissants, in a pair of Haydn’s Paris symphonies and, with Kristian Bezuidenhout at the fortepiano, Mozart’s Concerto No. 18; and Masaaki Suzuki and the Bach Collegium Japan, in works by Bach as well as Mozart’s Mass in C minor.
Recitalists include the pianist Paul Lewis; Julia Fischer, playing Bach’s complete works for solo violin; the pianist Piotr Anderszewski, in selections from the second volume of Bach’s “Well-Tempered Clavier”; the bel canto tenor Lawrence Brownlee, singing a selection of songs that inspired him when he was young; the virtuoso pianists Garrick Ohlsson and Kirill Gerstein, in a dual concert; and the avant-garde cellist Jay Campbell.
Opening the Great Performers season on Oct. 4, Mr. Welser-Möst and the Clevelanders will juxtapose Mozart’s Requiem and Feldman’s “Rothko Chapel.” Mr. Salonen, in his final season as principal conductor of the Philharmonia Orchestra, will lead two concerts: One of Brahms and Sibelius, and then the performance of Strauss’s “Elektra,” starring Iréne Theorin in the title role and the rising star Lise Davidsen, singing Chrysothemis for the first time.
Simon Rattle will conduct the London Symphony Orchestra in a pair of concerts, one featuring Mahler’s Symphony No. 6 and the other an immersion in Stravinsky ballet scores: “The Firebird,” “Petrushka” and “The Rite of Spring.”