Bill Ray, Photographer of Indelible Moments, Dies at 83
Bill Ray, one of the last staff photographers for the weekly Life magazine, who shot images as breathtaking as Marilyn Monroe singing “Happy Birthday” to President John F. Kennedy and as indelible as a Navy cruiser’s guns firing on the Vietcong, died on Jan. 9 at his home in Manhattan. He was 83.
His wife, Marlys Ray, confirmed the death. He learned he had atrial fibrillation in 2018, she said.
Mr. Ray turned down a job with National Geographic in 1957 to be a freelance photographer for Life, and joined its staff in 1964.
Over 15 years, he worked from bureaus in the United States and Europe to capture movie stars on sets, politicians on the campaign trail and homesteaders on the road from Detroit to Alaska. He also shot photos for a special issue of Life that looked at the Watts neighborhood of Los Angeles a year after the race riots there in 1965.
“Life was an enterprise built around photographers,” said Katherine A. Bussard, who with Kristen Gresh edited “Life Magazine and the Power of Photography” (to be published next month), and photographers like Mr. Ray were “integral to how it was conceived and functioned.”
He was at the Brooklyn Army Terminal when Pvt. Elvis Presley blew kisses to fans before shipping out to West Germany in 1958. He was in a rock garden and other locations with Konosuke Matsushita, the industrialist who founded Panasonic, for a special issue of Life about Japan in 1964. And he was on the Greek island of Skorpios when Jacqueline Kennedy married the billionaire shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis in 1968.
It had rained heavily on the day of the Onassis wedding, he was quoted as saying in “Life Photographers: What They Saw” (1998), by John Loengard. “The strobe, which was drenched at this point, fired about three times and then tried to electrocute me,” he said. “Then Onassis jumps on a golf cart and tries to run over me and whoever else was there.”
For President Kennedy’s 45th-birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden in 1962, Mr. Ray searched for a better angle than the cordoned-off area for photographers in front of the stage. He climbed atop a support beam, which afforded him a unique overhead view of Monroe from behind, her face unseen. Her skintight, flesh-colored Jean Louis dress shimmered in the bright spotlight as she gave a breathy rendition of “Happy birthday, Mr. President.”
But Life did not use the picture for its issue published after the party. In fact it did not appear for more than two decades, when it ran in one of the special issues that have come out periodically since the magazine ended its weekly run in 1972. Still, it became something of an annuity for Mr. Ray.
“I get more requests for that print than any other,” Mr. Ray told the website of Getty Images, which sells some of his work.
William Robert Ray was born on Feb. 16, 1936, in Columbus, Neb., to George and Waunita (Williams) Ray. He grew up nearby in the village of Shelby, which he once described as “a blend of ‘Our Town,’ ‘The Last Picture Show’ and ‘The Milk Train Doesn’t Stop Here Anymore.’”
His father owned a lumber yard. His mother was a painter who, wanting her son to find a life outside the village one day, supported his ambition to be a photographer. By 11 he had professional cameras and a darkroom.
Late in his senior year in high school, he brashly walked into the offices of The Lincoln Journal Star and described his passion for photography to one of the newspaper’s owners. He was hired and joined the paper upon his graduation in 1953.
After two years, he moved to the United Press bureau in Chicago. He left a year later to work for The Minneapolis Star and Tribune. At a summer workshop held in 1957 by the University of Missouri School of Journalism in Hannibal, Mo., he impressed editors from National Geographic with a photo essay about a local barber shop.
The magazine hired him to work from Washington. But when he arrived there, he backed out, saying he’d rather not spend time in rain forests. He quickly found work as a freelancer at Life, at one point traveling to Vietnam to photograph a naval bombardment from the deck of the cruiser Oklahoma City. He would stay with the magazine until it ceased weekly publication.
He went on to work for several other magazines, including Newsweek, where he photographed 46 covers and shot pictures for annual reports. His last assignment came several years ago, when he took portraits of recently retired rectors of St. Bartholomew’s Church in Manhattan.
In addition to his wife, who was also his agent, he is survived by his daughters, Hillary, Sabrina and Ashley Ray, and five grandchildren.