What Students Are Saying About 2020, Growing Up in Another Era, and Distraction
Happy 2020 to all our students and teachers! To kick off the New Year, we invited students to tell us their predictions about the year and decade ahead. We also asked them what bygone era they would have liked to have grown up in and how they deal with frenzied thoughts.
Special thanks to Hoggard High School and Lubbock Cooper High School for getting the new year off to a strong start with many thoughtful comments across our writing prompts.
And a warm welcome to new classes from Beverly Middle School, Classical High School, Garrison Middle School and Bristol Central High School.
Please note: Student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear exactly as they were originally submitted.
_________
In her column about tech predictions for the next decade, Opinion columnist Kara Swisher anticipates that automation will be used for good, social media will be depolarized, and we might finally put down our phones.
We asked students what they think will happen globally, nationally, locally or in their own lives in the next year or ten. From climate change to politics to sports, here are their predictions:
In the coming decade, I believe that the fight against climate change will increase as more of the younger generations are able to vote and be a part of our government. The older generations who didn’t do as much to save our planet and fight against emissions will be voted out of office. I think the signs of climate change like more intense wildfires and mass coral bleaching will be so obvious that the people who dismiss it as a hoax will see they are wrong. This decade will also bring about the use of cleaner energy. I believe that nuclear energy will have a resurgence as the younger generations who are more open to nuclear than the older generations see the need for it.
— Matthew Ewing, Lubbock
For the year of 2020 and the next decade I believe climate change will worsen due to inadequate action taken by world leaders, soon climate change will not be reversible. I also believe that there will be some huge technological advancements meant to deal with this crisis as the most innovative technology is made during the most desperate of times.
— Aahmad, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
I think that we will start to attack climate change at a more aggressive approach than in years passed. There is already a little bit being done about it but I think in 2020 more people will realize how important climate change really is. I think Donald Trump will not get re-elected and we will get a more progressive president, that leans towards saving the world from climate change. I also think that a lot of discrimination problems will become better. With the older generations going to die off, the younger generations can help to solve problems with climate change and discrimination, as they were left with it when the older generation left. I really hope a lot of our worlds issues come to an end or at least slow down.
— Adah D’Alba, Julia R. Masterman
I hope and believe more influential people will encourage people to donate money involving things that will help with environmental help and awareness, as well as putting in their own money to help out. People will finally realize what we are doing to our planet and choose to do something about it before the effects of pollution and global warning before the effects have became to far gone to reverse.
— Charisma Burns, Bristol CT
I believe that over the next decade one of the main things that will continue to grow is the use of social media. I think that social media is a big part of today’s society and that with teens and young adults getting paid based off of how many likes and subscribers they have, they aren’t getting real jobs. I feel like social media will be a cause of the decline in employees for young adults because they are all getting paid via social media.
— McKenna Emert, Lubbock
Social media has teens and even adults brainwashed into believing it is what brings them joy. It is an addictive machine built to make you keep on scrolling. It is an epidemic in my opinion that won’t be able to be solved in just one year, but I do hope we can make steps in the right direction. I would love to sit here and say that popular social media companies are seeing the damage their apps are having on kids and are finding ways to change that, but with how much money they are making off these time sucking apps, I don’t believe that is what they care about. I think the only way to change it is for some sort of law to be made.
— Lilah Pate, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I think that in the year 2020 there will be a major war. I think because Trump doesn’t put up with any threats from other countries we will be led into a war. I also think America will prosper in the year 2020 because we have a leader that is one of the most successful businessmen in the world. I predict that Trump will be elected into office again for his second term.
— Jordan Kirkpatrick, Lubbock, TX
The political divide will become more and more pronounced and violence will be used increasingly frequently. The public will be further whipped into a frenzy of fear on more issues such as China, Global Warming, and Artificial Intelligence that can only be solved by putting more and more power into the hands of fewer and fewer. It is possible to prevent this future, but unlikely as it would require large amounts of people to respect both each other and their country. It would require people to become individuals again instead of just a conglomeration of ideas heard from the internet. It would require a rebirth of real intellectualism. It would require the country to acquire the patience to occasionally be still instead of rushing blindly into the darkness of progress.
— Anders Olsen, Hoggard High School, Wilmington NC
While we are scrambling to find plausible solutions to things like climate change and racism, we are becoming more polarized and divided than ever. We are becoming more and more entrenched in our own views and instead of having insightful discussions where we are allowed to see other perspectives, we fight about our own opinions and solidify the fact that we will never see where other people are coming from. Because we are finally seeing how divided we are becoming, I think there will eventually be a turn for the better and after some trial and error, we will find a way to have helpful, intellectual discussions. Society is like a pendulum and it can only see that it has gone too far one way when it has gone as far as it possibly can. So, I think that we will eventually figure out how to have calm discussions about opposing views, but it will have to get worse before it gets better.
— Brynnan Brooks, Lubbock, TX
One prediction I have for 2030 is that the rate at which our country is becoming polarized will slow down at the very least, and perhaps even regress. As human beings, we can only be in a divided state for so long before tensions are relieved naturally or a conflict relives tension. I do not believe any large domestic conflicts will be taking place this decade, so I predict that people will naturally become less divided. We only have so much time and energy to yell and scream about politics, take sides, and to complain, and I feel people will become bored of this after years of doing so. This will allow for more free-flowing political discussions in America and should help to alleviate the feeling walking on eggshells when anything remotely political arises in conversation.
— Sam McNamara, John T. Hoggard High (Wilmington, NC)
With all the work in A.I. that various tech companies such as Apple, Samsung, Google, Microsoft, and Amazon have been doing, it’s only a matter of time before this Artificial Intelligence moves out of its shell and into bigger, more human-like robots that can assist workers, and eventually replace them which may or may not be good depending on how you look at it. Regarding the way technology and the way it affects our lives and how it will change in the next ten years, I don’t know. I personally don’t want anything to change about my way of life and the tech around me, sure, faster internet, easier means of transportation, and robot helpers Sound nice, but if we get too used to those innovations and never do any work of our own we may as well end up like the people from Wall-E, mindlessly floating around on our hover chairs with our lazy bodies having their every need catered to by a computer.
— Bryce Hollopeter, garrison middle school, Walla Walla, WA
I believe we should stop artificial intelligence from even becoming a thing. Not only will it take away many jobs from humans, it will take away human interaction. People won’t be going to the doctor’s office and speaking with a real human being who can understand a person’s emotions and relate to them. They will be speaking to a robot who will just prescribe them some medicine and send them on their way. Not only should we become a more understanding society in the 2020s, we should also become a more interactive society, and push for the end of the development of artificial intelligence, not only to save jobs, but to save ourselves.
— Carter Osborn, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
There is no telling where advancements in technology will bring us in this decade or even in this century. We could be rearranging the atoms in cars to make more food. We could be creating our own multiverse. We could be harnessing matter from other planets. In the late 2010s, we found a hint that the world will be more open-minded about change and about other people’s mentality. We legalized gay marriage and we became more socially aware of the LGBT+ community among others. And all of this change happened in just a decade, with more to come in this one. Think about the 60s. Look at how much work it took just to desegregate America. That took decades. Now, look where we are. We are introducing new genders! We are allowing people to change their gender! This all happened in the span of 5 years and this is just picking up speed now.
— Ian Condon, Hoggard High School
Not to start this off as a gloomy pessimist, but I think it’s all going downhill now. The problem? People. Sure, we don’t start natural disasters and you can’t blame an entire species for the mistakes of one person, but men and women all over the world are becoming exceedingly more and more aggressive. Instagram isn’t even a place to post pictures of your newborn baby anymore. Instead, it’s a place to bash our President, tell our next door neighbor Julie that her ideas on abortion are stupid and so on. Australia is already in flames and what are most celebrities with millions, even billions of dollars doing? Buying another Gucci bag and their fifth Lamborghini. Selfishness, aggression, and not having an open mind are going to continue plaguing the world. No matter how many disasters, political or natural, the world faces, humanity as a whole isn’t going to get it together any time soon. Happy New Year everyone.
— Faith Beene, Lubbock Cooper High School
The future is no doubt here. 20 or 30 years ago if you asked someone what they thought 2020 had in store they would probably envision a futuristic metropolis. Flying cars, jet packs, hovercrafts, and robots, the full “Jetsons” package but that is the opposite of what I think or at least hope 2020 has in for us. With the climate CRISIS pouncing on civilization what we need is a way to merge our world with the natural world. I think in 2020 we will see technologies improve so that we can almost regress in the damage we created and possibly fall out of the digitalized empire we have created. I predict that with the climate crisis we will learn from our mistakes and take preventative measures to keep it at bay and become one with the world and realize that no matter how strong governments or military forces are the one ally we need is the planet and no other war matters other than the war on climate change and greenhouse gasses.
— Ethan, Pinkey, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
The Yankees will win two World Championships. The Ravens will also win two Super Bowls. I believe that iPhones will become more of an addiction, and kids will have more social problems than ever before. Gas will become way more expensive than it is now. The prices for everything will rise even at the grocery store. The world will be better cared for by hospitals due to technological advances. Those are my main predictions for the next decade.
— Kaleb Scull, Lubbock, TX
Young people have grown up and witnessed terrorism, climate change, major political conflict, war, and an economic crash. We’ve seen a lot and know a lot. We are the most accepting generation so far, and may very well entirely change the workforce. This generation is also very well versed in technology, and may be able to use technology in a very different way. With the looming threat of climate change, I believe this new decade will bring a new fight against pollution and global warming. With new findings on Mars, I believe space exploration will continue. I even believe that scientists may be able to start properly experimenting in terraforming — changing a planet’s climate through introducing plants into the environment, so that it resembles the Earth. A new generation may bring a lot to the table in this new decade.
— Evin Berube, Bristol Central High School
_________
As 2019 came to a close, The New York Times looked back at the last 20 years and how they shaped millennials. And in this piece, The Times profiled the teenagers who crave going back in time to experience that era.
We asked our young readers if they are happy to be coming-of-age in 2020 or if they wish they could have grown up in another era. An overwhelming number said they would have loved to have lived during the 1970s or 1980s, while a few others pined for the 19th century or the future. But whether they wanted to grow up in 1870 or 2050, almost every commenter mentioned how technology — or its absence — would make their lives better.
I’m glad that I’m growing up when I am. If I’m being completely honest, growing up in any other era wouldn’t be great. If I was born 200 years ago I’d be a slave. If I was born 100 years ago, I would be oppressed. If I was born 25 years ago, I’d be living in the aftermath of crack. Growing up today isn’t perfect. Society still has its issues, but I’m glad it’s happening now rather than then.
20 years from now, I’d hope society has progressed even further. Past the gun violence, and climate destruction, and homophobia, and police brutality, and veiled bigotry. I hope that 20 years from now, my kids or their friends don’t feel like they have to aspire towards the past. I hope that they can appreciate the advancements society has made, that they can see past all the cool trends and music and clothes, and see this time through a wider lens.
— Jacob Jarrett, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I hear some people talk about how they wish they were raised in a different generation. They say that they wish they lived in the 50s, where diners, drive-in movies, and poodle skirts were everywhere. Or maybe even the 80s, when disco, fluorescent workout gear, and scrunchies were all the rage. But in these cases, they only take into account the aesthetics of the time period and not the wide social and economical issues that faced hundreds of thousands of people in America at those times.
In my eyes it’s almost as if they want to just completely disregard the things that have happened. Has the rampant racism, sexism, and classicism not turned you away from wanting to live back then? Then maybe mention of the AIDS epidemic in 1981 or the threat of nuclear war in 1983 might change your mind. As the children of Gen Z, we are extremely fortunate that we’ve grown up in such relatively inclusive times. So much is available to us and there are so many more opportunities for people who lacked them in the past. I think it’s a little bit silly for people to wish to go back in time when they don’t realize how good they have it now.
— Rachel Maston, Hoggard High School - Wilmington, NC
I am happy with the era that I’ve grown up in. I had a happy childhood, and I can’t imagine it any other way. I’ve experienced the growth of technology first hand, and I’ve got to say, early 2000’s was where it was at.
I’ve also grown up in an era where I’m accepted. I don’t look like everyone else, but I don’t get a whole lot of looks. I’m viewed as equal for the most part. A little while back, and I would’ve been discriminated against and oppressed. I am thankful to be a part of one of the most accepting generations.
— Shivani Patel, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
Sometimes I do wish I was born in a different decade. My parents grew up in the 80s and 90s and the stories they tell me seem like they are out of a movie. I love to hear my dad’s stories of when he was in high school, college, and even the military in the mid-90s. When I hear these stories I think about how much fun that would be. I wish I could have grown up in the 80s when technology didn’t control our lives. To talk to someone you actually had to speak face to face instead of texting.
— Andrew Gonthier, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
Although I love the generation I have been born into, I have always dreamed of growing up in the 80s. The same period my mom grew up in. I love looking at the pictures she took when she was in high school and in college. It feels as though I’m looking through a time machine. One of my favorite things about the 80s is the fashion and music. You can catch me wearing mom jeans listening to The Police or Led Zeppelin. Sometimes I feel as though I was born in the wrong generation. In a way, life seemed easier back then. Kids could run around with their neighborhood friends, as portrayed on TV shows, and there was less competition for getting into colleges and finding jobs.
— Sofia Noonan, Hoggard High School Wilmington, NC
If I could grow up in any era I would grow up in the 70s. The 70s marks a rebellious time of change and growth in American society, especially in terms of feminism. Being apart of the activists in the 70s would definitely be my scene. Additionally, the music was absolutely amazing and being able to see certain rock bands live would be a dream come true. For the most part, this is all inspired by how much I like That 70s Show. And while I enjoy fashion from mostly all decades, the 70s does have very retro and free spirited fashion that I love.
— Denna Jelvani, Middletown, NJ
I envy a time of more simplicity, when less technology allowed us, as a society to connect on a more personal level. A time when being outside and being carefree with friends was the ideal way to spend a day. However I cannot deny how amazing it is to be able to connect with people who live on different continents. And it’s for that reason I’m glad to be living in a time where we can focus on connecting on a global level, instead of a local one.
— Nuha S., Glenbard West, Glen Ellyn, IL
I love and hate the generation that I live in. Social media makes things complicated but the diversity makes it somewhat worth while. I sometimes wish to have lived in my parents’ generation, when there were house phones so you could get ahold of other people if you really needed to, but you didn’t carry around a small gadget with you like you couldn’t survive without it; I am just as guilty as the rest of them. When riding your bike to a friends house was normal, when sending letters was a way of communication. I don’t even think I’ve ever been to the post office before. I wish I didn’t live in a world surrounded by people hidden behind a screen, where social platforms were based off of how people looked, and that compliments were just in the comment section under a picture of someone in front of a sunset.
— Lauren McGowan, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
Y2K may be a great time, but I would like to go back even further when the ideals I hold would give me an opportunity to thrive and make connections. Though adapting to the lower tolerance of the culture, as well as the disease and lack of air conditioning, would be difficult, I would love to go back to the late Enlightenment Era. I know- a long way away from Y2K! I think that it would be cool to be on the front end of advancement, to be able to join the thinkers and the inventors and the scientists. Even though my mind as a woman would widely be regarded as inferior, I could be a part of a few trailblazers to help pave the way to the future! (Plus, I would like to try on a few of those dresses, even if I do enjoy my jeans and t-shirts).
— Gracelynn Whitaker, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I’m not sure if this counts as an ‘era’, but I’ve always wanted to have been born in the future. See, I was in history class the other day, learning about ancient civilizations. The people in those civilizations (presumably) took pride in the developments of their society. Our class, on the other hand, marveled at how the people in the past got by with such abysmal living conditions. So then I thought, maybe one day in the faraway future, there will be technology so advanced that the future-people will gape at the barbarity of status quo. But having been born in the 21st century, I will never know what the future-tech looks like.
— Livia Xia, B.C., Canada
I wish I had been born just a few decades later in 2050, this is because we were born too early to explore our universe, and too late to explore our planet. We watch shows and play games about space and the planets in our solar system that we will not be able to explore and experience for ourselves.
— William Renfroe, Beverly Middle School
I would have wanted to grow up in the 1870s because of how the world was transformed by industrialization and a new sense of international communication. I find this period interesting as the American western frontier finally reaches from sea to shining sea and the transcontinental railroad connected the country unlike ever before.
— Ethan, New Jersey
_________
We asked students to tell us what they believed the above GIF from our Picture Prompt “Head Spinning” was saying. They told us about feelings of distraction, overstimulation, and how everyday pressures can make the mind race.  
At first glance the picture represented how my head is constantly spinning. Restless and never seems to settle on what’s really at hand. That’s exactly how I feel right now. I feel so overwhelmed with work and things I need to do, I feel I need scheduled time to even stop and think. Think about what I want to do with my life. Being on a committed club soccer team there’s lots of pressure to decide what you want in a college and where you find yourself best fit. Even if you do find that dream school, do they even want you back? I feel like I would be happier and more successful if I went to college just for school, but I know I would feel incomplete without soccer. My parents tell me it’s not something that I need to be decided on yet, but when is the time. It’s fast approaching and I can’t even begin to put my thoughts in order.
— Avery Lemley, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I can relate to this personally because it seems like every time I am trying to focus on my school assignments, or college work my brain is going elsewhere. Not sure if its out of boredom or restlessness, but it happens. I think that this is a good representation of something everyone may go through every once in a while. We all have many things processing and piling up in our heads and it’s not always just calm and serenity up there.
— Victoria F., Providence, Rhode Island
The way that my brain is wired makes it so that I’m constantly overwhelmed with even the slightest bit of chores or school work, and when I get overwhelmed I just shut everything out and try to distract myself until my head is practically spinning and I am forced to deal with whatever I’m avoiding. This kind of mindset is extremely common in teenagers nowadays. We’re given so many assignments and tasks to complete in such short amounts of time that it’s nearly impossible to not be stressed, and when someone is stressed they turn to their personal coping mechanisms. Many people’s coping skill of choice is to try and ignore the issue until it becomes unbearable and their head starts to spin like the girl in this GIF.
— Rachel Maston, Hoggard High School - Wilmington, NC
This gif manifests every individuals’ tendency to wander when they are loaded with work, specifically work that undermines their skills. The gif shows how the person’s head is flying all around the room and cannot seem to get back into place to finish the task. This demonstrates the lack of engagement individuals experience when encountered with work that does not employ the skills of that person, leading to distractions and delay of the work as it will be perceived as something that can be done in a short amount of time.
— SK, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
I think what the gif is trying to say, is that when a person wants to write something, your head wanders to so many ideas and thoughts, but it can never really settle upon one or any. I can relate to this gif since I think I’m a bad writer. Whenever I want to write something, whether it’s for school or for myself, I always think of so many things to write, but just can’t piece any ideas together.
— Joshua Esquivel, Classical High School
When I first saw this image I immediately thought of myself. Ever since I was young, my parents have told me that I “wear my heart on my sleeve” and that they can always tell when I am thinking about something. My mind is in four different places when it should be in one. I am not the best when it comes to focusing and procrastination is a bad habit of mine. I pull out my homework. Do a problem, reward myself with a YouTube video. Do two more, reward again. Snack break. Work again. Reward. Bathroom break, it’s a never ending cycle. I am a good listener but would forget my head if it wasn’t attached. Overall, I am the epitome of “head spinning.”
— Lauren McGowan, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
As someone who considers themselves a ball of anxious energy, I can relate closely to this gif. The simple cartoon perfectly captures how it feels to be a fidget. In fact, as I’m writing this my knee is shaking up and down and I keep getting distracted by the conversations around me. Myself, and people like me find the most difficulty during times that we need to be productive. It is at these moment that our minds wander uncontrollably. Although this can seem like a curse of sorts, to a creative optimist like me it’s a blessing. I´ll admit it can be troublesome at times, however it can also be rather helpful. While my head’s in the clouds spinning it’s creating all sorts of ideas and concepts for my art. If I wasn’t ¨cursed¨ with short a attention span I wouldn’t be nearly as creative as I am now.
— Hydin S, RI
My back is hunched over my computer, my fingers a blur as I press different combinations of keys one after another. My eyes kept drifting to the corner of the small screen where the seconds were ticking by too quickly for my liking. The fact that I only had mere minutes left to complete and turn in the assignments for my online classes had massive amounts of adrenaline pumping through my veins. My thoughts raced around in my head, one after the other, with my hands picking up speed to try to keep up. Only seconds were left when I finally managed to complete the last of my assignments but there was no time to rest just yet. Quickly opening the web browser on my computer, I typed in the address to the platform where I turned in work and, in what I consider to be record-breaking time, managed to get all of my work submitted. I’d like to say that this has only happened to me once, but I’d be lying if I did. Procrastination is my character flaw, well one of them, and is something I’ve struggled with my whole life.
— Laura Arbona, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC