On Politics: Iowa Caucus Edition!
CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa — On the morning after Hillary Clinton lost in November 2016, I stood wedged between television cameras, in the back of a hotel ballroom, and watched a Democratic breakdown.
Ashen-faced Clinton aides stood in stunned silence. Supporters wiped tears from their eyes. A sense of shock hung heavy in the room.
I kept returning to that moment as I traveled across Iowa in recent days as this Democratic primary moves, finally, toward votes being cast and counted with tonight’s Iowa caucuses.
The 2016 election was a turning point in Democratic politics; a deeply painful event after which nothing would ever be the same. Even now, that trauma lingers.
As the candidates made their way across Iowa, the 2016 race was the subtext — and often just the text — of their closing messages.
“The less 2020 resembles 2016 in our party and our country, the better,” Pete Buttigieg told voters. Amy Klobuchar pledged to build a “beautiful blue wall of Democratic votes,” citing her tour of “the states that we should have won in 2016.”
Even some of the political drama feels like a rerun: Some supporters of Joe Biden are fretting that some backers of Bernie Sanders may disrupt the caucuses tonight, citing old intraparty anger about the 2016 primary.
Yet, as much as Democrats cannot seem to escape their past, the country’s political story has moved on. And now, on the cusp of the caucuses, the party faces its most significant decision since that crushing defeat: Does that 2016 loss, and all that followed in the Trump era, lead Democrats to dream big or dream safe?
“I’m torn between, do you vote for what you really want, or do you vote for what you think can happen?” Sara Curtin-Delara, a teacher from Coralville, told me, as she managed her 3-year-old son and listened to Klobuchar addressing a crowded hotel ballroom.
Biden hopes voters like Curtin-Delara go with safe. He’s closing his Iowa campaign arguing for experience and stability, casting himself as a steady hand in a dangerous world and a divided nation. Buttigieg has adopted a slightly younger variation of the same argument, saying the biggest risk for Democrats is “to look to the same Washington playbook.”
Sanders and Elizabeth Warren say the 2016 loss delivered a different lesson: Democrats cannot win unless they go big.
For Warren, the mantra plastered on her mint-green campaign signs is “dream big, fight hard.” Sanders promises to bring together a movement of millions, urging voters to have “the courage” to take on Wall Street greed, corruption and the military-industrial complex.
Even in the final hours, after years of angst and agonizing, Democrats still seemed slightly immobilized over how best to move past their old electoral wounds.
Curtin-Delara, who said she was choosing between Warren and Klobuchar, wondered if she should back the woman less likely to succeed in the caucuses to prolong her presence in the race. That, she argued, could give Democrats more time to pick the right candidate this time around.
“For the caucuses, it’s like, who do I want to keep in the race until tomorrow?” she said. “We can’t mess this up.”
It was time for final preparations on Sunday in Ames, Iowa, where Warren supporters organized caucus cards at a “Get Out the Caucus” rally.
Our politics reporters were fanned out across Iowa this weekend, attending dozens of events and following the major candidates as they made their final pushes. We asked each reporter for a quick appraisal of their candidate’s campaign.
While the rest of the candidates duke it out in Iowa, Michael Bloomberg is stumping across California. It’s voting day there too, sort of — early ballots will be mailed to millions of California voters today ahead of the state’s Super Tuesday primary. The former New York City mayor is making stops in Sacramento and Fresno before ending his day in Compton.
He will pick up the endorsement of Aja Brown, the mayor of Compton, a rising star in Democratic circles. Brown is one of several black California mayors backing Bloomberg, joining London Breed of San Francisco and Michael Tubbs of Stockton. With 415 delegates (10 times as many as in Iowa) California is one of the most important states in Bloomberg’s unusual bid for the Democratic nomination.