‘Birds of Prey’ Review: Nihilism for Fun and Profit
A lot of shocking stuff comes out of Harley Quinn’s mouth — maniacal giggles, streams of obscenity, big words to remind you that she has a Ph.D. in psychology, a splash of greenish vomit — but what caught my attention was the line “I voted for Bernie.”
This admission is offered up as part of a string of reasons for people in Gotham City to hate Harley, best known locally as the Joker’s (now ex-) girlfriend, and even though it’s a throwaway joke I can’t seem to let it go. Less because I’m distracted from my solemn movie-critic duties by electoral politics (though of course I am) than because the Bernie name-check is close to the only topical reference in all of “Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn).”
That title works very hard to achieve a puzzling effect — what is a “fantabulous emancipation”? why just “one” Harley Quinn? — and the rest of the movie, directed by Cathy Yan from a script by Christina Hodson, does the same. Including the scrap of dialogue I’m hung up on. What if instead of Bernie, Harley said she voted for Trump, or Hillary, or Jill Stein? Not as funny, for some reason. Are we meant to infer that she’s a socialist? Or (as she and others like to insist) that she’s crazy?
There isn’t really an answer. The answer is anything you want it to be. The senator from Vermont, whatever else he may achieve in 2020, has risen to the level of empty, vaguely humorous pop-cultural signifier. Whatever the name-check might mean, it’s a safe and easy reference.
Like “Joker,” “Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn)” is sincere in its commitment to nihilism, but coy about the implications of that commitment. Unlike “Joker,” this exercise in R-rated fan-flattery allows itself, and the audience, to have some fun with its noisy, hectic, self-conscious riffing on the conventions of comic-book-based entertainment.
Harley is played, as she was in “Suicide Squad,” by Margot Robbie, with strenuous attitude and abundant confidence in her own charm. This time, fortunately, she has a new squad. Her erstwhile beau the Joker, though he is frequently invoked, is never seen. Supervillain duties are taken up by the Gotham billionaire Roman Sionis (a gleeful Ewan McGregor). He and his chief minion (a glum Chris Messina) are venal, volatile sadists who like to slice off the faces of anyone who makes them mad. Harley has joined that group, and now that she no longer has the immunity of being Joker’s moll, Roman can dispose of her at will.
It’s more complicated than that, of course, as you might expect from a movie called “Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn).” (The more you say it, the less sense it makes.) The plot, driven by Harley’s hyperactive narration, zigzags and hopscotches across time and space to fill in the back stories of her frenemies, the as-yet-unhatched predatory birds who get top billing.
These include Cassandra Cain (Ella Jay Basco), a young pickpocket; Helena Bertinelli (Mary Elizabeth Winstead), a vengeful Mafia princess who wants to be known as the Huntress but who is usually called the Crossbow Killer for obvious reasons; and Dinah Lance (Jurnee Smollett-Bell), a singer in Sionis’s nightclub who is recruited for nastier work. On the other side of the law is Renee Montoya (Rosie Perez), a hard-as-nails Gotham detective who has grown bitter watching mediocre male colleagues receive credit and promotions for her work.
If Perez were to star in a stand-alone Renee Montoya movie (or an old-fashioned network-television cop series) I wouldn’t be mad. But this is Harley’s show, and it runs on a strange brew of righteousness and aggression, at once embracing and neutralizing the tropes of female anger and semi-feminist solidarity that are quickly becoming movie clichés. (The secondhand feeling is affirmed by the musical cues, which include “Black Betty,” “Barracuda” and other staples.) At times, a fed-up, cleareyed critique of male entitlement (and worse) snaps into focus — Sionis’s cruelty has a decidedly misogynist edge — only to dissolve into jokey irreverence.
The one thing “Birds of Prey” fears is being taken seriously, which makes it, again, something of an antidote to “Joker” and to the doomy solemnity of other DC products, going all the way back to “Batman Begins.” The mood of antic, playful obnoxiousness feels forced rather than liberated, the result of careful note-taking during repeated viewings of “Deadpool.” The rapid-fire repartee is less than sparkling, as if the goal were to sound smart while still appealing to the dumbest or most distracted person in the audience.
The fight scenes, on the other had, have snap and surprise — a hand-to-hand, martial-arts classicism that hasn’t been seen much in recent action movies. When Harley and her crew, outnumbered and outgunned, take on legions of muscular bad guys, “Birds of Prey” finds a rhythm and a logic, a sense of gravity and self-assurance, that is otherwise lacking.
It isn’t enough. Like other big-studio exercises in pseudo-subversion (very much including “Deadpool”), “Birds of Prey” is happy to play at provocation with swear words and violence while carefully declining to provoke anything like a thought. It’s really not that interesting that Harley Quinn voted for Bernie, though it might be very interesting to know why, or if she’s backing a different candidate this time around.