The New York Times Teaching Project, 2021-22
Update, May 12: The Learning Network will not be running The New York Times Teaching Project during the 2022-23 school year. We hope to resume the program for the following school year. Please visit our Webinars and Professional Development page to learn about all of our opportunities for educators, and sign up for our newsletter to keep up with everything going on at The Learning Network.
When we accepted 60 distinguished educators into the inaugural class of The New York Times Teaching Project early last spring, we still hoped that we’d be able to run an ambitious three-day institute for them in person in July. After it became clear it would be online only, we considered canceling and delaying the whole program for a year.
We’re so glad we didn’t. Our three days together last summer — and our collaborations in the months that have followed — have been extraordinary. At a time when teachers are working in the most challenging conditions most have ever faced, the cohort bonded across disciplines and locations to offer each other both support and inspiration.
Or, as Gabriel Graña, a librarian in Chapel Hill, N.C., put it on the final day of the summer institute:

We don’t yet know what challenges 2021-22 will throw at educators, but we do know that we’re stronger together. If you’re the kind of teacher who believes in bringing the mission of The Times — helping people understand the world through on-the-ground, expert and deeply reported independent journalism — to your school community in thoughtful and creative ways, we hope you will apply to join the second cohort of the Teaching Project.
The 2021-22 program will begin with a four-day virtual institute in July 2021, during which participants will explore new ways to use The Times and The Learning Network as curriculum resources; learn more about the behind-the-scenes journalism that creates the daily paper; and begin to create their own curriculum projects that fit the needs of their students and schools.
The program continues through the 2021-22 school year as participants work on their curriculum projects, collaborate virtually, and share ideas with their fellow cohort members, their schools and the larger Learning Network community.
To help you better understand the kinds of projects that participants can design, here is a glimpse into what this year’s cohort is working on:
What else do you need to know to determine if this program is right for you? Here are important details:
Our application is open. Space is limited. If you’re interested in participating, please read the information below. To apply, click here.
We’ve identified four main goals for The New York Times Teaching Project. Educators in the program will:
1) Explore new ways to use The New York Times and The Learning Network and learn more about the behind-the-scenes journalism that creates the daily paper.
2) Design learning experiences using The New York Times and current events that help students seek the truth and understand the world.
3) Contribute to a professional learning community of educators who share effective practices, resources and lessons-learned related to teaching with The Times.
4) Bring new experiences, teaching strategies and curriculum resources from this program to your school community and beyond.
The New York Times Teaching Project consists of two components. If selected, participation in both is required.
1) A Four-Day Virtual Summer Institute (July 12-15, 2021)
During this institute, participants will:
2) A 2021-22 Program
Throughout the 2021-22 school year, participants will:
If selected, in order to complete the program, all participants are required to:
We are accepting applications on a rolling basis until Feb. 2. We encourage you to apply as soon as possible.
Do you meet the following criteria?
We are excited for the opportunity to work with you this summer and the following year. If you are interested in applying, please click here.
Please see below if you have questions about the summer institute or general program. If you still have questions about the program, please email us at teacherPD@nytimes.com.
Summer Institute Questions
General Program Questions
1. Program Description: Participants will apply to be selected to participate in The New York Times Teaching Project 2021-22 Program. Participants will be invited to submit applications, which will be reviewed by NYT. By applying for this Program, each participant agrees to be bound by these Program rules and to the decisions of NYT, which are final and binding on all matters relating to the Program. The application submission period begins on November 19, 2020, and ends at 11:59 p.m. E.T. on Feb. 2, 2021 (the “Submission Period”). To be eligible, submissions must be submitted during the Submission Period and in accordance with Section 2 of these Program rules.
2. Eligibility: The Program is open only to legal residents of the fifty (50) United States and the District of Columbia who are at least eighteen (18) years old at the time of entry and current high school or middle school teachers or librarians in the United States (each an “Applicant”). Employees, representatives, agents, directors, and officers of NYT as well as the immediate family (spouse, parents, siblings and children) and household members of each such employee are not eligible. The Program is subject to all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
3. How to Enter: To apply for the Program, during the Submission Period visit the Teaching Project 2021-22 Program application page located here. Then, follow the provided instructions to complete and thereafter submit the entry form.
4. Notification: The selected applicants will be notified by email (via the email address listed on the Entry Form) or phone by mid to late April 2021, and will be required to respond (as directed) to the notification attempt. If a potential program participant is unavailable to attend the virtual institute on the dates specified by NYT, the potential participant will be disqualified and an alternate entry may be selected in its place from all eligible entries received. NYT reserves the right to extend or modify the Program participant notification and announcement schedule as NYT deems necessary in its sole discretion to complete the verification process and/or to select an alternate Program participant.
5. Program Institute. Each Program participant will receive the opportunity to participate in a four (4) day virtual summer institute on July 12-15, 2021. Participants will also have the opportunity to participate in virtual hangouts facilitated by The Learning Network throughout the 2021-22 school year where they will have the opportunity to present work and seek live feedback and support.
6. Applicant Release: By submitting an entry, each Applicant agrees to release, discharge, and hold harmless NYT and its affiliates and agents, and all others associated with the development and execution of this Program, and the officers, directors, and employees of each of the foregoing, from any and all claims and liabilities arising from or in connection with participation in this Program, including, without limitation claims for injury, loss, or damage of any kind resulting from participation in this Program. If an Entrant is a California resident, such Entrant hereby waives California Civil Code Section 1542, which states: “A general release does not extend to claims which the creditor does not know or suspect to exist in his or her favor at the time of executing the release, which, if known by him or her must have materially affected his or her settlement with the debtor.”
7. General Terms and Conditions: NYT reserves the right in its sole discretion, without prior notice to (i) cancel, suspend and/or modify the Program, or any part of it, if any fraud, technical failures or any other factor beyond NYT’s reasonable control impairs the integrity or proper functioning of the Program, as determined by NYT; (ii) disqualify any individual it finds to be acting in violation of these Program rules; and (iii) dismiss participants from further participation in the Program as a result of conduct that is considered improper or offensive. NYT’s failure to enforce any term of these Program rules shall not constitute a waiver of that provision.
8. Privacy Policy: Any personal information supplied by an Entrant will be subject to NYT’s privacy policy posted at https://www.nytimes.com/content/help/rights/privacy/ policy/privacy-policy.html, and the supplemental terms of these Program rules.
The New York Times Company does not discriminate on the basis of an individual’s sex, age, race, color, creed, national origin, alienage, religion, marital status, pregnancy, sexual orientation or affectional preference, gender identity and expression, disability, genetic trait or predisposition, carrier status, citizenship, veteran or military status and other personal characteristics protected by law. All applications will receive consideration without regard to legally protected characteristics.
Editor’s Note: This post has been updated on Nov. 19, 2020 with information about the 2nd year of The New York Times Teaching Project.