Comedy Written for the Machines
I am going to describe a video that threw me into a pit of despair. It begins with a woman running into the aisle of a big-box store and telling a tween boy that she needs phone chargers. He asks why; she says all her chargers are missing. “You came to the right place,” he says, gesturing to the rack next to him. “This is Android, though,” the woman says. “I need iPhone.” The boy tells her she will find iPhone chargers if she takes five steps back. Here the performance shifts from mere stiltedness to a kind of hateful Kabuki, an affected defiance of how people naturally act: She walks backward, counting her steps, then turns and slaps her forehead. “Whoa,” she says. “That was so . . . amazing.” She drops a charger trying to take it off the rack. “Whoops,” she says, looking at the camera without affect. The boy says, “Androids are trash, but they make a living” — a phrase that comes to me now unbidden as I fall asleep, jolting me awake in a way I imagine is common to unpunished murderers. The woman says that iPhones make a living, too, and asks, “You ready to cash out?” Then it’s over.
This clip has reportedly been viewed more than four million times on TikTok, the Chinese-­owned video-sharing app that is especially popular among teen­agers. The creator of the video, @Angelmamii7, has uploaded dozens like it, but this one is the masterpiece that started it all. Now she has a middling sort of viral fame that includes 690,000 followers on TikTok, a less popular but more monetizable YouTube channel, and write-ups in online publications like Business Insider and The Daily Dot. Thousands of words have been written analyzing her work, but no one seems to know why the charger video — which contains no jokes, no surprises, no stakes, no suspense, no changes in the characters or their circumstances and nothing that a normal person would call a story — is so popular.
The short explanation is that TikTok has served it to a large number of users via its algorithmically-curated feed, a tautology that points to some fundamental differences between TikTok and other platforms that recommend user-generated content. While all social-media companies treat their algorithms as trade secrets, sites like Facebook are known to rely largely on friend networks to guess what a given user might like; if your co-workers watched a particular video, the Facebook algorithm will probably suggest it to you. But TikTok, which has no friend network, relies on an artificial-intelligence-driven algorithm. According to an article in Fast Company, the TikTok algorithm analyzes the videos a user has already watched, along a wide variety of metrics — some of which operate below the level of perception, such as facial structures and types of voices. The A.I. recommends new videos it “thinks” a user will like, sees if it guessed right and learns accordingly.
This method, as with the more conventional friends- and recommendation-driven algorithms of Instagram and Twitter, means that the culture of TikTok is shaped by hidden factors in ways that may lead to unexpected outcomes. Once a machine-learning system has been running for a while, its decisions can become mysterious even to its creators. The TikTok algorithm is a kind of Frankenstein’s monster, if the monster sought videos of teenagers dancing to Megan Thee Stallion in their bedrooms instead of revenge. For this reason, no human being can really say why Angelmamii7’s phone-charger video is so popular, not even Angelmamii7.
In their Business Insider interview, she and her husband, John, who met at a TikTok event in March 2019 and often make videos together, describe a process that could charitably be called trial and error. “We don’t really write anything down,” she says, claiming that although they’ve planned some videos in advance, most are inspired by locations they see while driving.
“We intentionally try to make ourselves not make sense in a way,” John told Business Insider, “and that’s what’s been working.”
This last observation — that their videos don’t even make sense to them, but they try to replicate what works — is the key to understanding the Angelmamii7 oeuvre. It’s characterized by forced conflicts that violate internal continuity, as when she is disappointed because there’s no milk in the empty beer cave at the store, then finds the milk and says, “But I wanted beer”; or the one in which her husband doesn’t know it’s his birthday and then gets mad she didn’t buy him a present. They keep going to big-box stores for name-brand products: In one, everyone wants an iPhone 11 at Target; another takes place at Walmart, where her sons want to buy headphones to play Fortnite on their PlayStation 4. In another, Angelmamii7 herself wants headphones; it follows the same beats as the charger video, right down to counting backward steps and being artificially astonished at what she finds, but it received only 16 percent as many likes. Maybe the viral recipe is birthdays and brand names plus nonsense, as in the video where her son asks if he can buy a bottle of Gatorade, and she says: “It’s John’s birthday, so now you can put this back. It’s not Gatorade’s birthday.”
After watching hours of these videos, I realized there’s no use trying to make sense of any one of them, but taken as a body of work, they tell a story: the struggles of a person trying to go viral again. To watch several in succession is to watch increasingly familiar characters endure a kind of psychological experiment, in which they get rewarded, or don’t, according to a system they cannot understand. The forced acting and desperate re-creation of previously successful formulas make Angelmamii7’s videos into a profound modern drama of people flailing against absurdity — or perhaps a classic drama of people struggling against fate.
Maybe that’s why millions of internet users keep watching, sometimes, and other times do not. Or maybe none of that is right. Maybe there is some other arbitrary system governing us all. Maybe the story of Angelmamii7 is not one woman and her family trying to hit the jackpot by doing what even they do not understand but a whole culture responding to incentives we can’t articulate but are being trained to follow, moment to moment, by a dopamine-drip system we carry in our pockets. We never stop talking to it. It demands our attention and rewards us arbitrarily, unexpectedly. It inserts itself in conversations with our friends and teaches us its figures of speech, its sense of humor, until we talk like it and find ourselves repeating its jokes even when it isn’t around. And in the end we think it’s the funniest thing in the world. We can’t explain why. It just is.