How I Got the Latest Clue to a 30-Year-Old Puzzle at the C.I.A.
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
The email arrived on Jan. 2. Three words: “Are you ready?”
I was.
The email was from Jim Sanborn, a sculptor whose work I have written about for more than 20 years.
Some names show up in your inbox and it feels as if you’ve gotten a jolt. That’s how I feel whenever I hear from Jim. I’m not an art critic. But I have written about computer security and encryption at various stages of my career, and Mr. Sanborn created a cryptographic puzzle that has stumped enthusiasts for decades. It is a sculpture at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., called Kryptos. (The name, from the Greek, means “hidden.”)
The sculpture, which contains four encoded passages cut into a tall sheet of wave-shaped copper, has been an obsession for thousands of people around the world. I’ve had a relationship of sorts with this work of art since I first wrote about it in 1999, when I was a tech reporter for The Washington Post. I joined The Times as a reporter in 2000, and these days I cover climate.
The first time I wrote about Kryptos, I reported that two people had said they had solved the mysteries of the first three encoded passages. (Later, the National Security Agency would reveal that its employees had cracked the code somewhat earlier, but didn’t announce it because the N.S.A. doesn’t talk about anything.)
For my Post article, I visited C.I.A. headquarters and saw the moving, oddly powerful work, which sits in a courtyard near the cafeteria in an area not open to the public. (I stopped in the gift shop on my way out, and bought a C.I.A. T-shirt. How could I not? But it turned out to be scratchy, so I don’t wear it.)
In 1999, when I first reported on Kryptos, it seemed that with three of the passages from the sculpture decoded, the fourth would be cracked pretty quickly.
Ha.
Twenty years later, and 30 years after the sculpture first appeared at C.I.A. headquarters, the secret of those last 97 characters remains as solid as the log of petrified wood that makes up part of the work.
Over time, Mr. Sanborn has tried to provide clues that could move people along, since he has been hounded by people who believe, mistakenly, that they have cracked the last passage, known as K4. He was getting 200 inquiries a week, he told me, which “became overwhelming and some became threatening and even, believe it or not, racist.” For $50, people could submit a proposed solution and get an answer, which “made things much more manageable,” he said.
He provided a clue to me in 2010 that we published in The New York Times. And again in 2014. And now.
He called me in late 2019 to suggest he might be about to release another clue, to move things along. At a recent gathering of Kryptos fans, he had said he wanted me to take it on. I said yes, of course.
I love Mr. Sanborn’s work. When I stumbled upon one of his unmistakable pieces on the campus of the University of Iowa, a metal cylinder with punched-through letters in many languages that is lit from within at night, casting text on the courtyard and walls around it, it seemed so instantly familiar that I felt as if I were encountering an old friend in a strange town.
But Kryptos, his decades-old piece, has become something of a millstone for him, he said. “My cryptography interest left me 25 years ago,” he told me as I was finishing the latest article. “My art went in different directions.” That’s an understatement. While he has produced other cryptographic pieces, he has also produced astonishing installations that straddle art and science, and, most recently, “Without Provenance: The Making of Contemporary Antiquity,” a collection of objects that explores the nature of looted antiquities and forgery in unsettling ways.
Perhaps the most interesting part of my call from Mr. Sanborn is his decision to arrange an auction to sell the solution to the mystery, whether after his death or before. If the amount of money raised is substantial — and this, he admits, is unknown — it will go to support climate science. He lives on an island in the Chesapeake Bay, so as he told me, it was a “no-brainer.” Coincidentally, this put the Kryptos news within my current beat.
As I worked on the story about the final clue, my editor, Hannah Fairfield, liked the graphics possibilities of portraying the coded and decoded passages; Jonathan Corum, the amazing science graphics editor, agreed to do his magic. And you can see the result.
Much of the time, journalism is jack rabbit quick, with the need to leap when news breaks.
Sometimes it’s slow, and things can percolate. And sometimes it even helps us solve a puzzle.