Corrections: Jan. 18, 2020
An article on Friday about a report that said the White House violated a law by withholding aid to Ukraine described incorrectly the legislative history of the Impoundment Control Act. The bill was signed into law in 1974 by President Richard M. Nixon after being passed in Congress; it is not the case that the bill was passed over the veto of Mr. Nixon.
An article on Wednesday about a new contract between the W.N.B.A. and its players’ union, using information from a league official, described incorrectly the teams that will play for the title in the Commissioner’s Cup. The top team in each conference with the best record in Cup games will play for the title, not the top two teams over all.
A book review on Thursday about “Imperfect Union” by Steve Inskeep misidentified the location for “ground zero of the California gold rush.” It was Sutter’s Mill, not Sutter’s Creek.
A dance entry in the Listings pages on Friday about Complexions Contemporary Ballet misstated the anniversary that the company is celebrating. It is the 26th anniversary, not the 25th.
An art entry in the Listings pages on Friday about the Cooper Hewitt Design Triennial included outdated information about a work that was part of the exhibition. “Fantasma,” a work consisting of dresses made of a glowing transgenic silk, is no longer on view; it is not on view through Monday. (The portion of the exhibition that included that work, which was shown in a photograph, closed on Jan. 12.)
An article on Page 48 about split-jury verdicts misstates the number of people the Innocence Project New Orleans says have been exonerated in Louisiana since 2000. It is 43, not 56.
An article on Page 42 about the staging of sex scenes for film and theater misstates Siobhan Richardson’s title. She is an intimacy director, not an intimacy coordinator. The article also omits an aspect of her relationship to Intimacy Directors International. She is one of the founders. And the article misstates the name of the theater program at the New School. It is the School of Drama at the New School, not the New School for Drama.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.