A Different Way to Show Readers the World
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
As a native German, Katrin Bennhold was familiar with some of her compatriots’ penchant for walking around topless at lakes and beaches. But near the end of summer in 2018, while riding her bicycle to The Times’s Berlin bureau through Tiergarten, Berlin’s equivalent of Central Park, Ms. Bennhold was surprised to discover people tanning completely naked in the middle of the park.
A year later, she shared her amazement about this cultural facet, and what it means to Germany and its people, in an article known as a Dispatch.
“When you’re a correspondent, and there’s a moment that really surprises you,” Ms. Bennhold, The Times’s Berlin bureau chief, said, “usually there’s a good Dispatch.”
Every day, The Times’s international correspondents and reporters keep readers apprised of the major news from the places they cover: stories about migration and its impact, elections and their consequences, protest movements, and geopolitical conflict.
But Dispatches, although often related to the news, have a different goal. They are “a different lens through which to view the world,” said Suzanne Spector, the lead editor of Dispatches on the International desk. They “tell stories that are not necessarily the official stories but are more focused on a sense of place and people’s lives.”
The dying tradition of clay drinking water pots in Myanmar reflects, among many other things, a changing society. Following a winemaker in his backyard vineyard and a person on his dog walking routine in Austria reveals the impact of hard European borders on border town residents.
Until 2017, The Times offered readers Journals, a kind of story that Bill Keller, a former executive editor of The Times and of the foreign desk before that, described as, “the place for the story you know would most delight your family in a letter home, or your friends over a beer,” and “written from beginning to end.”
Dispatches are a reinvention of this storytelling, with several noteworthy changes: Visuals are now central to these stories, which are nearly always conceived with photos, video and design in mind, and they can be on the news.
Looping drone video provided perspective of the immensity of the landscape surrounding a Russian village swallowed by sand, while weeks of photographing and recording video of a protest site in Khartoum, Sudan, resulted in a gorgeous, illustrative portrayal of life following the toppling of the nation’s longtime dictator, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.
“I think Dispatches are built for photography,” said Bryan Denton, a photographer and Times contributor who captured the images in Khartoum. “You can’t pitch a Dispatch unless it has a visual component.”
Dispatches, editors said, are also a chance to experiment with forms of storytelling, with more voice in the writing than typically found in the rest of the international report. They might be told in chapters, or in analytical vignettes that read as if they are straight from a reporter’s notebook.
In certain circumstances when reporters feel that their experience helps inform their understanding of a story, they might write in first person, as Ernesto Londoño, The Times’s Brazil bureau chief, did when profiling the Brazilian drug kingpin Marcelo Pinheiro Veiga, who was being held in a prison in Asunción, Paraguay.
In the article, Mr. Londoño recounted how, just hours after interviewing Mr. Veiga in his jail cell, the drug lord stabbed a woman visiting him in his cell 17 times, killing her.
The thrust of the article was a tragic narrative “about the state of the drug trade in the region and the weakness of institutions,” Mr. Londoño said. But, through his personal brush with death, one close enough that he could smell the killer’s breath during the interview, Mr. Londoño conveyed the gravity of being able to “stare into the eyes of somebody who appears to be extraordinarily evil and bloodthirsty.”
The most important thing when writing Dispatches, according to Jason Horowitz, The Times’s Rome bureau chief, is that these articles have a narrative arc.
When writing about the Barcolana, the world’s largest regatta, he was sweating at the last minute over the realization that there was no conflict driving the narrative. And then, the weather changed.
“I needed tension and I needed a bad guy, and the bad guy came in the fact that there was no wind,” Mr. Horowitz said. “I was like, ‘Thank God. It’s going to be fine.’”