Bogus Populism and Bad Music
To the Editor:
Anand Giridharadas’s review of Michael Lind’s “The New Class War: Saving Democracy From the Managerial Elite” (Jan. 19) is appropriately critical of the thesis that the white working-class voters who support Donald Trump are demonstrating understandable frustration with “elites.”
The photograph accompanying the review, which shows construction workers waiting for Trump to speak in western Pennsylvania in 2019, appears on the surface to illustrate Lind’s view. A more accurate caption, however, would back up Giridharadas’s point perfectly, since these workers were told by their employers (as reported in The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette) that if they did not attend the rally they would not be paid for the day. That rally, and that photograph, epitomize the phony “populism” of our current president.
Robert Shaffer
Mechanicsburg, Pa.
To the Editor:
Jonathan Rauch’s review of Christopher Caldwell’s “The Age of Entitlement: America Since the Sixties” (Jan. 19) raised objections to the author’s central thesis that the Civil Rights Act was anti-constitutional. But Rauch’s objections were distressingly gentle. The 1788 Constitution, which Caldwell holds up as sacrosanct, legitimized human slavery. Even after ratification of the 14th Amendment, Jim Crow laws kept huge swaths of citizens from enjoying the legal protection the Constitution is meant to provide. To understand our current political and social environment, rather than a tortured speculation that the Civil Rights Act allowed unentitled groups to become entitled, one might postulate that the Supreme Court, whose mission is to protect the letter and spirit of the Constitution, has failed at that critical mission.
Jonathan M. Rosen
Stamford, Conn.
To the Editor:
In his review of Ted Gioia’s “Music: A Subversive History” (Jan. 12), David Hajdu reminds us that the works of the great composers often puzzled or even infuriated the listeners of their time. I’d like to recommend a book that illustrates some of this frustration. Nicolas Slonimsky’s “A Lexicon of Musical Invective” is a collection of bad (even scathing) reviews of great classical works. Many seem little more than opportunities for the reviewers to show off their witticisms, and we still see that today. But the book, in its illustration of cultural narrow-mindedness, remains highly enjoyable reading.
Floyd Gumble
Carmel, N.Y.
To the Editor:
It’s beyond absurd. According to Alana Semuels’s review of Daniel Susskind’s “A World Without Work: Technology, Automation, and How We Should Respond” (Jan. 19), we’re devoting huge sums of money and calling upon our best scientific minds so we can perfect the very entity that will replace us. Has mankind ever done anything dumber?
Nancy Stark
New York
