Impeachment, 2020 Debate, Andy Warhol: Your Tuesday Evening Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. The House will vote on Wednesday to send articles of impeachment to the Senate, allowing the long-awaited trial of President Trump to begin.
“The American people deserve the truth, and the Constitution demands a trial,” Speaker Nancy Pelosi said.
Before the vote, Ms. Pelosi said she would appoint the team of lawmakers who would serve as prosecutors — known as managers — in the case against Mr. Trump. The House managers will walk the articles of impeachment from the House chamber to the Senate and read them aloud in their entirety, prompting the Senate trial to commence. Here’s a step-by-step guide to the trial.
Chief Justice John Roberts will preside over the trial in a largely ceremonial role. But there is some risk involved: signs of partisanship could damage the Supreme Court.
2. As six presidential hopefuls face off tonight, one analogy is hanging over the Democratic debate: “Mom and Dad are fighting.”
That was how one left-wing activist summed up this week’s clash between Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, two liberal rivals who had previously honored an unofficial nonaggression pact. The sudden rift — triggered by a contested statement by Mr. Sanders to Ms. Warren in 2018 that a woman couldn’t win in 2020 — has disheartened progressives, who fear it may provide an advantage to the party’s moderate candidates.
The debate in Des Moines is underway and we have live commentary and analysis from our Politics team. Here are the dynamics to watch.
The Times’s editorial board is publishing transcripts of its interviews with the candidates, leading up to its endorsement for the Democratic nomination on Sunday night’s episode of “The Weekly.” First up: Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren and Tom Steyer.
3. Britain, Germany and France accused Iran of breaking the 2015 agreement that limited its nuclear program.
The European countries started the clock on two months of negotiations with Tehran, a process that was delayed when the United States killed a top Iranian commander, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani. Failure to resolve the dispute could revive U.N. sanctions on Iran. Above, a nuclear plant in Arak in December.
Separately, President Hassan Rouhani of Iran called for a special court to examine the downing of a Ukrainian passenger plane. New video shows two missiles fired 30 seconds apart took down Flight 752, killing 176 people.
4. In case you missed it: Security experts say the Russian military has hacked the Ukrainian company at the center of President Trump’s impeachment. Experts suspect the hackers are seeking information on the Bidens.
The hacking attempts against the gas company, Burisma, which had employed Hunter Biden, began in early November, as talk of the Bidens, Ukraine and impeachment was dominating the news in the U.S. Above the company’s office in Kyiv.
Separately, the National Security Agency alerted Microsoft about a major security flaw in Windows. The warning allowed Microsoft to develop a patch for the problem, and it appeared to be a shift in strategy for the intelligence agency: The agency’s past practice was to create weapons to exploit such vulnerabilities.
5. The W.N.B.A. and its union agreed in principle on a contract that would sharply increase salaries and benefits, in a milestone for female athletes.
The proposed W.N.B.A. contract, which still must be approved by the league’s board of governors and the union’s membership, would enable top players to earn more than $500,000, about triple of last season’s ceiling. Paid maternity leave would also be offered for the first time.
Cathy Engelbert, the commissioner of the W.N.B.A., called the change a “big bet on women.”
6. We’re following multiple disaster recovery efforts abroad.
The Australian beach town Mallacoota, above, and about a dozen other communities have grown tense after being cut off from the world by wildfires, and help has come slowly. Some towns are accessible only by planes or helicopters, which have been dropping water, food and satellite phones — and even carrots for wildlife.
In the Philippines, toxic ash and smoke have transformed the verdant island of Taal, a popular tourist spot, into a lifeless gray carpet since a volcano erupted there on Sunday. At least 30,000 people have fled, and another eruption may be imminent.
7. As the #MeToo era grew, Donna Rotunno embraced the role of contrarian. Now she’s representing Harvey Weinstein.
Long before an avalanche of allegations against Mr. Weinstein set off a global reckoning over sexual harassment, Ms. Rotunno, above left, built a career as a criminal lawyer with an unusual specialty: defending men accused of sex crimes. Her work has drawn stinging criticism from feminists.
“We can’t have movements that strip us of our fundamental rights,” she said.
The #MeToo era has changed a lot about the movies. Studios and theaters are hiring intimacy coordinators to keep actors safe. The twist: They’re also making the scenes sexier.
8. “I always broke the rules.”
That’s how Jean-Georges Vongerichten says he went from a small-town truant and “terror,” in his family’s words, to one of the most ingenious and adventurous chefs in the history of cuisine. He and his business partner now operate 38 restaurants around the world, with more to come.
Our Food section also has two restaurant reviews this week: Hotville, which specializes in Nashville-style hot chicken in Los Angeles, is a critic’s pick. And Sushi Nakazawa in New York was downgraded from four stars to three.
Here are the city’s remaining four-star restaurants (including one of Mr. Vongerichten’s.)
9. Photography was Andy Warhol’s secret weapon. A new show in Manhattan highlights many of his rarely seen images.
The photographs, created between 1967 and 1987, record the most ordinary moments in his random daily activities, as well as his Polaroid portraits, still lifes and nudes.
And a new exhibition in San Francisco makes art out of the Patagonia vest, the former prime minister of England and tech bros. The show is “proof positive that clothes are part of the currency of our times, no matter where you look,” our chief fashion critic writes.
10. And finally, an act of kindness.
For nearly six years, large piles of 20-pound notes mysteriously appeared in a village in northeastern England. The bundles left in the village, Blackhall Colliery, often amounted to 2,000 pounds (about $2,600) and were left in places where people in need would be likely to find them.
The police revealed this week that two people who wished to be known only as good Samaritans had been distributing the money in an effort to “give something back” to the community. The police said one of the Samaritans felt an “emotional connection” to the village after being helped by one of its residents, “so she wanted to repay the kindness received.”
Have a generous night.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European, African or American morning.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.