Six Angels Singing the ‘Blues’
Pearl Cleage’s drama “Blues for an Alabama Sky” drops the audience into the world of Harlem Renaissance artists after the Champagne has stopped flowing.
They include the tantalizing lounge singer Angel Allen and her roommate, Guy, a confident gay costume designer. Leland, an Alabama transplant, comes to be part of their dysfunctional family of artists, who are grappling with poverty, pregnancy, homophobia and how to create in desperate times.
First presented by Atlanta’s Alliance Theater in 1995, “Blues” has been consistently produced regionally and at universities since, but Keen Company is staging the first major New York production beginning Feb. 4, directed by LA Williams. The show is slated to run through March 14 Off Broadway, at Theater Row.
“These characters have been moving around in New York,” Cleage said by phone recently. “Now they are in New York.”
It is Angel in whom many black actresses, including Phylicia Rashad, Robin Givens and Jasmine Guy, have found an ideal leading lady. She is straight-shooting and charismatic, a bit past her prime but slinking her way in and out of men’s lives — always to their detriment.
Rashad, a few years beyond “The Cosby Show,” originated the part in a show directed by Kenny Leon. “Rashad’s Angel is worn down by life but still a fighter, and still a full-blooded woman,” The Washington Post wrote in its review when the production moved to Arena Stage there. “She’s more sensual putting on a dress than most women are taking one off.”
While writing “Blues,” Cleage wanted to portray characters not typically found onstage. When Alliance remounted it on its 20th anniversary, she rewrote the ending, leaving Angel unredeemed. “People don’t always see the light,” the playwright explained.
On the eve of its New York premiere, The New York Times spoke to six actors who’ve played the role, including Alfie Fuller, who is starring in the Keen Company production. How did Angel help them take flight? Edited responses follow.
The Tony Award-winning actress and director has been friends with Cleage since they were theater students at Howard University in the 1970s. She performed in “Puppetplay,” one of Cleage’s earlier works.
The star of “Tyler Perry’s The Haves and the Have Nots” on OWN and Perry’s new Netflix film “A Fall From Grace,” she understudied Rashad in 1995 and starred in the Alliance’s 2015 revival, directed by Susan Booth.
Her first lead role was in the 2011 African Continuum Theater Company production of the work in Washington. She is now a performing-arts consultant and splits her time between Washington and New Orleans.
Played Angel in 2012 at the Lorraine Hansberry Theater in San Francisco just after graduating from the American Conservatory Theater. She co-starred in the 2019 feature film “Don’t Let Go” opposite David Oyelowo.
Played Angel in the 2017 production at Chicago’s Court Theater, directed by Ron OJ Parson. It was her first leading role in a play and the experience motivated her to move to Los Angeles to expand her career. She is now a star of the forthcoming Netflix series “Warrior Nun,” which is based on a manga graphic novel.
“Blues for an Alabama Sky” follows up her roles in the Off Broadway hits “Is God Is” at Soho Rep and “BLKS” at MCC Theater.