An Art-Lover Alert to the Voice and the Tap on the Shoulder
WASHINGTON — Perhaps Dani Levinas should be writing this article himself.
Among his many roles, Mr. Levinas — an avid art collector and the chairman of the board of the Phillips Collection, the modern-art museum in Dupont Circle — is a columnist who writes about other art patrons for El País, one of Spain’s biggest newspapers.
“I don’t just collect art, I collect collectors,” said Mr. Levinas, 71. For the last 50 years, he and his wife, Mirella, 69, have been buying art, much of which is in their Georgetown home, a grand old residence that has been made over into an ultramodern showplace. (It was once owned by Evalyn Walsh McLean, of Hope diamond fame.) The couple, both of whom come from Argentina, also have a place in Miami.
The Levinas collection numbers in the hundreds, and about two-thirds of it is by Latin American artists. Some of the makers, like the Mexican artist Gabriel de la Mora and the Chilean artist Iván Navarro, are quite established, but others would qualify as new names to many. “You don’t see the same old suspects here,” Mr. Levinas said.
The couple are active in philanthropy; Ms. Levinas is on the board of the Reina Sofía Museum in Madrid. They are both retired (he from a variety of careers, including publishing, she from representing two Cartier shops), and increasingly, their time is spent on collecting. They pursue their interest at galleries and art fairs (Art Basel Miami Beach, ARCO Madrid, Zona Maco in Mexico City).
“I take the lead, but I have to have her approval,” Mr. Levinas said. “Usually I get it.”
Their trove, primarily paintings and sculptures, seems to oscillate between two poles: spare conceptual pieces and works of lush color. Mr. Levinas recently chatted about his taste in art and how it has evolved. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Since I am turning the tables on you, what do you normally start with when interviewing a collector?
I ask them the motivation for them to start collecting. And then why they decided to share the collection with the world.
So, what’s your answer?
Because I love it. I love to help artists, but I also enjoy living with the pieces. Take this piece by Jose Dávila [“Untitled,” a stack of bricks surrounded by neon]. I saw it in Mexico. He’s big now, but he wasn’t big when I bought this piece. The point is that when I saw it, I said, “This is so beautiful to me.” It doesn’t mean that it’s going to be beautiful to you, but it touches me and it talks to me.
I always ask: Is there one that got away?
I don’t know, it’s so hard to remember.
There’s so much color in some of these works, but not all.
That’s a big change, because people used to come to my house some years ago and everything was no-color; it was a lot of black and gray and white.
What happened?
In the last three or four years I decided to dedicate myself to look for more paintings and color. After 50 years of collecting, you change; the artwork changes and you change, too. I’m going back more to painting because I feel the connection with the artist more.
How explicit is the Latin theme for you?
I am not going into a place looking for Latin American artists. This piece [“Suelo I, II, III” (2013)] I bought it in Italy from a U.K. gallery. When I saw it, I didn’t know who he was: It’s Gabriel de la Mora. I bought it without knowing.
Have you ever collected Doris Salcedo? She would seem to fit here.
That’s the one I missed! Thank you for reminding me. It was around 1985 at an auction. The work had white shirts, and a piece of iron in the center. And I said, “This is so beautiful.” I didn’t know much about her, but I really loved it. For some reason, I didn’t get it.