Coronavirus in California: What to Know
Good morning.
(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)
The coronavirus outbreak that has killed more than 420 people in China is sending waves of panic around the world as it sickens thousands, scrambles travel and rattles economies.
At the same time, fears about the outbreak have fueled racist sentiment both abroad and here in the U.S. — even as health officials note that the risk here is relatively low.
On college campuses, students of Asian descent said they’ve been unsettled by the glares they get when they cough. At the University of California, Berkeley, a post by the university’s health services that said “xenophobia” would be a “normal” response to anxiety over the virus led to an immediate backlash, and the post’s removal.
My colleague Farhad Manjoo wrote recently in a column that what he finds more worrisome than a little-understood, dangerous illness is the spread of misinformation and fear, which have historically been used to justify acts of repression against minorities.
[Have you or someone you know faced prejudice in the United States as a result of coronavirus fears? Please contact us at coronavirus@nytimes.com if you are willing to share your story.]
All this is to say the situation is serious, but it’s important not to lose perspective. The flu, for example, has caused 10,000 deaths in the U.S. this season, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
So here are some answers about the coronavirus:
A husband and wife in San Benito County learned they had the illness on Sunday and were taken by ambulance to a hospital in San Francisco on Monday, according to The San Francisco Chronicle. They were the first cases involving the household person-to-person transmission of coronavirus in California.
[Read about a 17-year-old exchange student’s journey back to the U.S.]
[See how various factors will determine how bad the outbreak will get.]
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
In Monday’s newsletter, my colleague Jennifer Medina told us about what Californians should keep an eye out for in the Iowa caucuses. She mentioned that Joe Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders, especially, were ones to watch to gauge whether they would be heading west, where they’ve been campaigning heavily, with momentum.
Well, things got confusing, and the release of the Iowa caucus results was delayed after inconsistencies in the reporting of data, officials said. So we’ll be waiting a little longer to be able to interpret the results — and how they may reshape the race in California.
Also: Here’s everything you need to know about registering to vote in California. [The New York Times]
Read more about how Los Angeles counts its homeless population. [The New York Times]
Last winter, atmospheric rivers drenched the state, yielding a super bloom.
The state’s deserts exploded in color, and Instagrammers descended. Some drew the ire of locals and environmentalists, who saw people trampling flowers and clogging traffic in pursuit of the perfect shot.
This year, though, The Desert Sun reported that such a profusion of wildflowers is less likely, thanks to a drier start to the year.
Still, the piece offered some tips for flower peeping; it’ll still be beautiful, if less gregariously colored.
And I suspect that the advice I got last year from Casey Schreiner, the founder and editor of Modern Hiker, will still hold up for optimizing spring nature excursions: Do a little research and be flexible. (Here’s how.)
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.