Lesson of the Day: ‘These Images Show the Sun’s Surface in Greater Detail Than Ever Before’
Featured Article: “These Images Show the Sun’s Surface in Greater Detail Than Ever Before”
On Jan. 29, the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope released the most detailed images ever taken of the surface of our sun.
“These images are just the beginning,” said David Boboltz, a program director in National Science Foundation’s Division of Astronomical Sciences. He added, “The Inouye Solar Telescope will collect more information about our sun during the first five years of its lifetime than all the solar data gathered since Galileo first pointed a telescope at the sun in 1612.”
In this lesson, you will examine the new images of the sun’s surface and consider how this knowledge might impact our lives. In a Going Further activity, you will choose a question or mystery about our nearest star to explore further.
What does the sun look like?
You have probably drawn a picture of the sun at some point in your life: a simple yellow circle with lines or triangles surrounding it. Do you think it really looks like that?
Based on what you know about the sun — its structure and makeup — what do you think its surface actually looks like? Is it perfectly round? Smooth? Rough? Is it static or in motion? Uniform or varied? Is it the color of the yellow in a box of crayons? Or something more complex?
Take a few minutes and make a sketch of the surface of the sun.
Then, describe your drawing and explain what evidence supports your prediction. (If you’re in a classroom setting, share your drawing with a classmate and explain how you came up with it.)
Next, look at the images of the surface of the sun just released by the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope. Then answer the following questions:
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. Dennis Overbye, the writer, says of the new images, “the sun looks like a boiling pot of popcorn, belying the notion of a bland yellow orb.” Do you agree with his description? How else might you describe the surface?
2. Explain scientifically what is happening on the surface of the sun to create the appearance of “a boiling pot of popcorn”?
3. What is space weather? Why are radiation hazards from space weather so hazardous to human travel to Mars and beyond?
4. What is the story of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope? Where is it located and why? What features of the telescope are most fascinating to you?
6. The article concludes:
What questions about the sun would you like scientists to investigate? How might the answers to your questions affect and benefit our lives?
7. Mr. Overbye writes:
What do you think he means by his statement? What romance or mysteries do you think stars like our sun hold? How often do you gaze at the stars at night? What do you think or feel when you stare into glistening lights in the night’s sky?
Choose one of the following activities:
1) Research an intriguing question about the sun.
Today’s featured article only scratches the surface of the surface of our sun (O.K., bad pun). Many other questions and mysteries remain:
What is our sun made of? When and how did it begin? What is the weather on the sun? Why do we get sunburns and suntans? Why shouldn’t you look at the sun — even during an eclipse? What are the sun’s rogue plasma waves and magnetic islands? And many more …
You might consider using your research as the basis for an entry to our informational writing contest that runs until March 3, 2020, in which we’re challenging students to write an explanation, in 500 words or less, about any STEM-related concept that will engage and enlighten readers.
2) Do you think the United States should invest more in the study of the cosmos?
In “Will the United States Lose the Universe?” Mr. Overbye writes that “for more than a century, American astronomers have held bragging rights as observers of the cosmos. But that dominance may soon slip away”:
The article concludes:
What do you think? Is the United States in danger of losing its supremacy in the study of the universe? What will be lost if we do? Should the United States invest more money in the building of large-scale telescopes?
3) Should telescopes be built on sacred land?
In “The Thirty Meter Telescope Can Show Us the Universe. But at What Cost?” John Edward Huth, a professor of physics at Harvard, writes:
Do you agree? Should the plan to build the Thirty Meter Telescope on sacred lands be scrapped? Or is it more important to gather valuable information about the secrets of the universe?
You might consider writing your ideas in the form of an editorial and then submitting your final draft to our Seventh Annual Student Editorial Contest that will run from Feb. 13, 2020 to March 31, 2020.