Stocks Fall as Second Virus Case in U.S. Spooks Investors
Stocks in the United States suffered their worst decline since early October, amid concern that a dangerous new virus could hurt the global economy.
On Wall Street, the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq composite index both dropped 0.9 percent on Friday. The declines picked up steam after officials said a second case of the virus, the coronavirus, had been diagnosed in the United States. The patient, a woman in her 60s in Chicago, had recently traveled to Wuhan, China, the center of the outbreak.
Earlier Friday, the Chinese authorities broadened a travel lockdown in central China to 12 cities near Wuhan. The orders effectively pen in 35 million residents to try to contain the virus, which had led to at least 41 deaths by Friday evening and more than 1,000 infections worldwide.
Airline shares — exposed to the impact of travel restrictions related to the virus — dropped sharply, American Airlines by 4 percent and United Airlines by 3.5 percent.
The news also battered shares of companies with significant exposure to the Chinese market. Shares of the casino company Wynn Resorts, which is heavily reliant on revenue from Chinese gamblers in Macau, fell more than 3 percent.
Commodities markets also reflected a downbeat view of the outlook for global growth on Friday, with prices for oil and copper falling.
Energy and materials stocks also slumped during Friday’s trading session. Chevron fell more than 1 percent, while Exxon Mobil dropped 0.7 percent.
Financial shares faltered after some regional banks reported lackluster demand for commercial lending in recent days. Huntington Bancshares fell 3.8 percent, while KeyCorp and Regions Financial both fell more than 2.5 percent. JPMorgan Chase fell 2.5 percent.
The stumble in financial stocks mirrored a sharp drop in bond yields, which serve as the foundation for commercial lending rates and can have an impact on the profitability of loans. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 1.68 percent.
Updates on the spreading virus overshadowed bright spots for investors throughout the day. Surveys of activity in the American manufacturing and services sectors both showed growth in January.
And on Thursday, after the close of trading, Intel announced better-than-expected profit and sales results for the fourth quarter, citing strong growth in sales of chips for data centers. Intel’s shares rose more than 8 percent.
Before the start of trading on Friday, American Express reported better-than-expected profits and provided an optimistic outlook for results in 2020. Its shares rose 2.8 percent.
At times, Friday’s sell-off was a steeper slide than investors had experienced in a while, with stocks down more than 1.2 percent at some points in the afternoon.
Had the S&P 500 closed at that level, the decline would have been the index’s first of more than 1 percent since Oct. 8, when a flare-up of tensions between the United States and China sent shares down 1.6 percent.
Ultimately, the market pared back some of its deepest losses before the close of trading. Even after the drop, the S&P 500 remains up 2 percent in January, a strong start after the market’s 28.9 percent rise in 2019.