12 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
OVERCOATS at Webster Hall (Feb. 4-5, 9 p.m.). Though their close harmonies are rendered in a style associated with traditional country sibling groups, this Brooklyn-based duo is neither old-fashioned nor related. The singer-songwriters Hana Elion and JJ Mitchell layer their tightknit vocals into bright electronic soundscapes — a winning recipe that has earned them admiration from a fellow folktronica ambassador, Maggie Rogers, and an opening slot on Mitski’s “Be the Cowboy” tour. Overcoats have not released an album since “Young,” their 2017 debut, but a recently released EP suggests that the pair are hard at work in the studio. At Webster Hall, they’ll open for the Californian indie-rock group Cold War Kids.
websterhall.com

TAYLA PARX at Baby’s All Right (Feb. 6, 7 p.m.). Though not a household name, this Texan has already left her mark on pop music as a co-writer of numerous Hot 100 hits, including Ariana Grande’s record-smashing 2018 single, “Thank U, Next.” Now, like her fellow writers-turned-singers Jessie J and Julia Michaels, Parx is attempting to harness her own star power and break down barriers between the studio and the stage. She formally introduced her solo project last spring with “We Need to Talk,” a debut record laden with playful pop melody and R&B swagger. After opening for Lizzo at Brooklyn Steel in May, Parx returns to New York for an intimate headlining show in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
718-599-5800, babysallright.com
POPPY at Brooklyn Steel (Feb. 6, 8 p.m.). The actor and singer Moriah Pereira is from Nashville, but Poppy, the eerily polished persona she adopts onstage and in popular videos, is, as she told NPR, “from the internet.” In 2017, Pereira leveraged her following on YouTube, where her performances have ranged from unnerving but innocuous to undeniably sinister, to secure a recording contract with Diplo’s Mad Decent label. Her first few releases leaned into the cloying sounds of bubblegum pop, but her latest effort, released this month, explores her darker side through industrial and nu-metal influences. Like the digital world whence Poppy emerged, the album, titled “I Disagree,” is hyper-stimulating.
888-929-7849, bowerypresents.com

GRACE POTTER at the Beacon Theater (Feb. 1, 8 p.m.). This singer earned her stripes as one of rock’s most reliable frontwomen: With the Nocturnals, Potter spent years working the festival circuit, lending her signature smoldering vocals to the band’s jammy, soul-infused roots rock. But her 2015 solo album and the band’s subsequent dissolution signaled new endeavors for Potter, both sonically and personally. These changes informed a new album, “Daylight,” which she released in October. When Potter performs at the Beacon, expect to hear emotional songs from that track list, documenting Potter’s recent life changes, including new love and motherhood, as well as Nocturnals-era stompers like “Paris (Ooh La La).”
212-465-6000, msg.com
RAPSODY at Elsewhere (Feb. 6, 8 p.m.). This North Carolina-based M.C.’s fascination with heritage — already evident on her Grammy-nominated record from 2017, which she titled “Laila’s Wisdom” after her grandmother — came to the fore last year with the release of her third album, “Eve.” Naming every one of its songs after a prominent black woman and using each one’s story as a scaffold for her own, Rapsody traced a powerful lineage spanning from Sojourner Truth to Nina Simone to Michelle Obama. The challenge of such an exercise is not getting lost in the shadows of such luminaries, but cunning lyricism and catchy hooks, which are sure to be on display when Rapsody performs at Elsewhere, affirm her own star power.
elsewherebrooklyn.com

[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
RODDY RICCH at Brooklyn Steel (Jan. 31, 9 p.m.). If you’ve opened TikTok lately, you’ve probably heard the screeching, two-note hook that defines this rapper’s biggest hit. The Compton, Calif., native has enjoyed an auspicious start to 2020, marked by the ascent of “The Box” — propelled, in part, by its popularity on the video-sharing app — to the No. 1 spot on the Hot 100. He also scored a Grammy for his performance on Nipsey Hussle’s “Racks in the Middle.” Currently on tour behind “Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial,” a grab bag of a debut that borrows from a variety of regional styles, Ricch is set to perform in Brooklyn on Friday night. The show is sold out, but tickets are available on the resale market.
888-929-7849, bowerypresents.com
OLIVIA HORN
RAFIQ BHATIA at National Sawdust (Feb. 5, 8 p.m.). It’s not enough to call Bhatia a guitarist and leave it at that, just like it’s insufficient to simply refer to his new EP, “Standards Vol. 1,” by its name. He treats his guitar, synthesizers, drum machines and electronic effects as architectural elements — sound becomes contour; music becomes something to step into rather than merely follow. So he has done more than retouch or reinterpret the four jazz standards and pseudo-standards that appear on this EP (including two from Duke Ellington). He has found certain elements in each tune to celebrate and center, and others to dump upside down. There’s something fascinatingly complete about each track — also something unnerving. Bhatia will perform the material here with a group that includes the guest vocalists Vuyo Sotashe and Nina Moffitt.
646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org
DEE DEE BRIDGEWATER at the Blue Note (Feb. 5-9, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). Among the most celebrated Renaissance women in jazz, this vocalist is a Grammy and a Tony winner, a United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization goodwill ambassador and a spokeswoman for jazz across the world. She also has a boisterously personal style and can comfortably inhabit various aspects of the black-music tradition without losing her creative grounding. Her most recent albums have included a tribute to Memphis soul, a collaboration with the New Orleans Jazz Orchestra and a Billie Holiday project.
212-475-8592, bluenote.net
RAVI COLTRANE at Jazz Standard (Feb. 4-9, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Coltrane has released just one leadership album in the past decade, but he’s kept a busy and diverse itinerary as a bandleader in live scenarios. If recording devices have been running, there ought to be enough material by now for a boxed set of live recordings from his past 10 years, full of various bands and projects. The band this saxophonist will bring to New York in the coming week is new, and if the personnel is any indication it suggests an interest in tacking to the center of a certain musical tradition, with help from musicians whose hometowns all boast rich, nurturing jazz histories: the pianist Orrin Evans, from Philadelphia; the bassist Bob Hurst, from Detroit; and the drummer Jeff Watts, known as Tain, from Pittsburgh. (Allan Mednard, a New Yorker, will fill the drum chair from Tuesday to Feb. 6.)
212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
GHIDORAH at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 31-Feb. 1, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Three of the leading tenor saxophonists in straight-ahead jazz come together here in a group named for the three-headed monster of postwar Japanese film lore. (The name is also a glancing reference to MF Doom, the underground hip-hop heavy, who has used Ghidorah as an alias.) The front line — J. D. Allen, Stacy Dillard and Marcus Strickland — is certainly qualified to lead a seminar in contemporary, tradition-rooted tenor improvising. They’ll be joined only by a bassist, Eric Wheeler, and a drummer, Rodney Green.
646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
SIGURD HOLE at Weill Recital Hall (Feb. 3, 8 p.m.). This bassist is about to release “Lys/Morke,” a ruminative and openhearted album on which his only accompaniment is the ambient sound he recorded on the Norwegian island of Fleinvaer. The swirl of wind or the rushing of water sometimes serve as a backdrop to Hole’s playing; elsewhere they close in around his quiet bowing, threatening to overwhelm him. He will perform music from the album at this show, his Carnegie Hall debut, which also features a brief performance and talk from David Rothenberg, a musician and philosopher who studies the interplay between music and nature.
212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
RENE MCLEAN at Zinc Bar (Jan. 31, 7 and 8:30 p.m.). McLean is an adroit alto saxophonist with a perfervid delivery who, despite a distinguished family line, has not enjoyed the kind of sustained critical attention that his peers might tell you he deserves. He appears here with a cohort of top-shelf collaborators: Josh Evans on trumpet, Hubert Eaves III on piano, Radu Ben Judah on bass, Neil Clarke on percussion and Darrell Green on drums. The trombonist Grachan Moncur III — who recorded often for Blue Note Records in the 1960s alongside McLean’s father, the eminent alto saxophonist Jackie McLean — will appear as a special guest.
212-477-9462, zincjazz.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO