Did the Civil Rights Movement Go Wrong?
THE AGE OF ENTITLEMENT
America Since the Sixties
By Christopher Caldwell
In September 2016, a scholar named Angelo M. Codevilla published an article in the conservative Claremont Review of Books ominously titled “After the Republic.” The election, he said, would not change the fact that “the Republic established by America’s founders is probably gone” — kicked aside by the 1964 Civil Rights Act, “the little law that ate the Constitution.” With or without Donald Trump, “we have stepped over the threshold of a revolution,” he warned. “Regardless of who wins in 2016, this revolution’s sentiments will grow in volume and intensity, and are sure to empower politicians likely to make Americans nostalgic for Donald Trump’s moderation.”
I overlooked Codevilla’s article in 2016, but I am paying attention now. As he predicted, American conservatism is moving in an ever angrier, more radical direction, unassuaged by its control of the presidency, the Senate and a majority on the Supreme Court. The sunny optimism of Ronald Reagan’s City on a Hill is banished; Steve Bannon, Sarah Palin, Patrick Buchanan and the ghost of George Wallace lead conservatism now. And, of course, Trump. If Christopher Caldwell’s new book is any indicator, the movement is only headed deeper into gloom, resentment and white identity politics.
Caldwell warrants attention. He is one of the right’s most gifted and astute journalists, noted especially for his thoughtful writings on Europe. “Western Europe became a multiethnic society in a fit of absence of mind,” he wrote in his 2009 book on Islam and immigration in Europe, a provocative and pessimistic take that won critical plaudits. His new book, “The Age of Entitlement: America Since the Sixties,” is even more provocative and pessimistic.
Like the liberal writer Mark Lilla, Caldwell reinterprets Reagan as an enabler, not an opponent, of Me Generation self-absorption. The ethos of me-first individualism, unrestrained capitalism, opportunistic globalization, liberal immigration and release from traditional sexual norms suited elites of both political parties, but it was not so good for the working-class, tradition-minded Americans who are said to form the country’s backbone. Adding insult to injury, they were looked down on by progressives and ignored by conservatives. No wonder they rebelled.
If you think Caldwell sounds like Bannon, the self-appointed tribune of Trumpian working-class populism, you’re right. But the conservative critique of Davos Man has a lot to say that deserves a hearing. Conservative intellectuals like Oren Cass and David Frum and Yuval Levin, along with Republican politicians like Senators Josh Hawley and Mike Lee and Ben Sasse, are rethinking Reagan-Thatcherism from beleaguered workers’ and communities’ point of view. And not a moment too soon. If Caldwell’s book ended there, it would honorably augment that conversation.
But it does not end there, because the real heart of Caldwell’s story is race and civil rights. A more descriptive subtitle might be: “How the Civil Rights Revolution Overturned the Constitution, Divided America and Victimized Whites.”
In Caldwell’s telling, the Civil Rights Act, which banned many forms of discrimination, was a swindle. Billed as a one-time correction that would end segregation and consign race consciousness to the past, it actually started an endless and escalating campaign of race-conscious social engineering. Imperialistically, civil rights expanded to include “people of color” and immigrants and gays and, in short, anyone who was not native-born, white and straight — all in service of “the task that civil rights laws were meant to carry out — the top-down management of various ethnic, regional and social groups.”
With civil rights as their bulldozer, in Caldwell’s view, progressive movements ran amok. They “could now, through the authority of civil rights law, override every barrier that democracy might seek to erect against them”; the law and rhetoric of civil rights “gave them an iron grip on the levers of state power.” And so, today, affirmative action discriminates against whites and then lies about it; public and private bureaucracies trample freedom of association; political correctness stigmatizes dissent and censors language and even thought; “every single state must now honor” Martin Luther King Jr., “and affirm its delight in doing so.”
The civil rights revolution, to Caldwell, is nothing less than constitutional in scope — or, more precisely, anti-constitutional, because it overturns “the de jure constitution of 1788, with all the traditional forms of jurisprudential legitimacy and centuries of American culture behind it,” replacing it with a “new, minoritarian constitution” that pushes race-consciousness into every cranny of society. White men, the losers in the new order, responded by adopting their own identitarian, victim-group mind-set. “They fell asleep thinking of themselves as the people who had built this country and woke up to find themselves occupying the bottom rung of an official hierarchy of races.”
And so here we are, not one country but two, governed by two constitutions, not one. “Democrats, loyal to the post-1964 constitution, could not acknowledge (or even see) that they owed their ascendancy to a rollback of the basic constitutional freedoms Americans cherished most. Republicans, loyal to the pre-1964 constitution, could not acknowledge (or even see) that the only way back to the free country of their ideals was through the repeal of the civil rights laws. The combination was a terrible one — rising tensions along with a society-wide inability to talk or think straight about anything.”
Nor is even that miserable dispensation the whole of it. Engaging in what Marxists call “heightening the contradictions,” Caldwell argues that the oppressive imperialism of civil rights laws is not incidental. Citizens, he writes, must “choose between these two orders.” There never was a moderate, limited way to keep the promises of integration. “Civil rights was always this way: Dignity was an integral and nonnegotiable part of what was demanded, and a government interested in civil rights must secure it, no matter what the cost in rights to those who would deny it.” Associational freedoms and property rights were always on the chopping block, incompatible with the 1964 act. Caldwell notices that “it tended to be segregationists who philosophized in this vein” — and yes, he does go there, quoting an old-time Southern segregationist to the effect that a merchant’s right not to serve blacks is “simple justice.”
Perhaps the author should have come up for oxygen when he found himself suggesting that the Southern segregationists were right all along. Reading this overwrought and strangely airless book, one would never imagine a different way of viewing things, one that rejects Caldwell’s ultimatum to “choose between these two orders.” In that view — my own — America has seen multiple refoundings, among them the Jackson era’s populism, the Civil War era’s abolition of slavery, the Progressive era’s governmental reforms and the New Deal era’s economic and welfare interventions. All of them, like the civil rights revolution, sparked tense and sometimes violent clashes between competing views of the Constitution and basic rights, but in my version of history, those tensions proved not only survivable but fruitful, and working through them has been an engine of dynamism and renewal, not destruction and oppression. I worry about the illiberal excesses of identity politics and political correctness, but I think excesses is what they are, and I think they, too, can be worked through. Being a homosexual American now miraculously married to my husband for almost a decade, I can’t help feeling astonished by a history of America since 1964 that finds space for only one paragraph briefly acknowledging the civil rights movement’s social and moral achievements — before hastening back to “But the costs of civil rights were high.”
Perhaps most depressingly, Caldwell’s account, even if one accepts its cramped view of the Constitution and its one-eyed moral bookkeeping, leads nowhere. It proffers no constructive alternative, no plausible policy or path. The author knows perfectly well that there will be no “repeal of the civil rights laws.” He foresees only endless, grinding, negative-sum cultural and political warfare between two intractably opposed “constitutions.” His vision is a dead end. Unfortunately, it also seems to be where American conservatism is going.