What’s on TV Sunday: ‘The Masked Singer’ and the Super Bowl
THE MASKED SINGER 10:30 p.m. on Fox. You may ask yourself two questions while watching this vocal competition: Who’s behind the mask, and how can they breathe in that thing? The series, back for Season 3, has celebrities compete against one another by belting out pop songs while decked out in elaborate disguises. The contestants’ identities are only revealed after they are voted off the show. (Previous singers include a shimmering butterfly and a fox in a top hat.) Nick Cannon returns as host, joined by the panelists Ken Jeong, Jenny McCarthy, Nicole Scherzinger and Robin Thicke.
GREAT PERFORMANCES AT THE MET: MADAMA BUTTERFLY 12 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). The film director Anthony Minghella revives this timeless opera by Puccini. The soprano Hui He plays the title role, a geisha waiting for her American husband (Bruce Sledge) to return to Japan in the early 20th century. Pier Giorgio Morandi conducts.
SUPER BOWL LIV 6:30 p.m. on Fox. The San Francisco 49ers go up against the Kansas City Chiefs in Miami. The 49ers were last seen at the Super Bowl in 2013, while this is the Chiefs’ first time on football’s biggest stage in 50 years. Jennifer Lopez and Shakira perform during the halftime show, while President Trump and the 2020 presidential candidate and former New York mayor Michael R. Bloomberg present dueling ads during the commercial breaks. Expect plenty of star power in the other spots, including Bryan Cranston channeling “The Shining” in an ad for Mountain Dew.
THE EE BRITISH ACADEMY FILM AWARDS 2020 9 p.m. on BBC America. This annual awards show, commonly known as the BAFTAS, is Britain’s equivalent of the Oscars. Todd Phillips’s comic book flick, “Joker,” leads the contenders with 11 nominations. In the best film category, it’s competing with “1917,” from Sam Mendes; “The Irishman,” from Martin Scorsese; “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood,” from Quentin Tarantino and “Parasite,” from Bong Joon Ho. Graham Norton (of “The Graham Norton Show”) hosts.
PRECIOUS (2009) Stream on Amazon; rent on Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. Gabourey Sidibe will be back on the big screen this month in a new comedy, “Come As You Are.” More than 10 years ago, she burst onto the scene with her breakout role in “Precious,” a drama drawn from the novel “Push.” Set in 1980s New York, the film follows Claireece “Precious” Jones, an illiterate teenager who has never had it easy. Her classmates bully her; her mother (Mo’Nique, in an Oscar-winning role) is physically and verbally abusive; and her father has impregnated her — twice. But there is a glimmer of hope when Precious is transferred to an alternative school and meets a caring teacher (Paula Patton) and social worker (Mariah Carey). A.O. Scott named the film a Critic’s Pick in his review for The New York Times and wrote that Sidibe is the glue that holds it together.