Iran, Endorsements and a Debate Surprise: This Week in the 2020 Race
Welcome to On Politics on this Saturday morning.
It’s about to get real, dear readers. The Iowa caucuses are just over three weeks away, and the New Hampshire primary is in a month. The Democratic field — 13 candidates, still one of the largest groups ever — could soon be drastically winnowed.
Here’s a look at what happened on the trail this week.
The candidates presented unified opposition to war with Iran, laying the blame for the Middle East crisis at the feet of President Trump.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. faulted the president for bringing the nation “dangerously close” to war after an American drone strike that killed one of Iran’s top military commanders, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts said Mr. Trump had undertaken “reckless actions” that “have made us far less safe.” Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont repeatedly warned that “war should be avoided in every way that we can.” And former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., a military veteran, emphasized his personal experience in a war zone.
Marianne Williamson, the self-help author and spiritual adviser who launched a thousand memes, announced on Friday that she would drop out of the race, saying she did not want to “get in the way” of progressive candidates competing in close contests.
“I stayed in the race to take advantage of every possible opportunity to share our message,” Ms. Williamson said. “With caucuses and primaries now about to begin, however, we will not be able to garner enough votes in the election to elevate our conversation any more than it is now.”
Ms. Williamson built her campaign around an eclectic mix of progressive policies and lofty pronouncements, calling for reparations and a Department of Peace. She also drew substantial criticism for calling vaccine mandates “Orwellian” and for suggesting that antidepressants are dangerous.
On Monday morning, Julián Castro, the former housing secretary who recently ended his campaign, endorsed Ms. Warren and hit the trail with her shortly thereafter, joining her Tuesday night at a rally at Kings Theater in Brooklyn. Mr. Castro ran a campaign centered on progressive ideas and cast Ms. Warren as the logical extension of his social-justice-driven message.
Sunrise Movement, the politically influential collection of young climate activists, announced on Thursday that it was endorsing Mr. Sanders. Mr. Buttigieg received an endorsement from Representative Anthony G. Brown of Maryland, the first black member of Congress to formally back him.
And Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles, who himself mulled a presidential run, endorsed Mr. Biden. The endorsement may help boost Mr. Biden in delegate-rich California, a state that Mr. Sanders is counting on and where former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York is spending significant resources.
Friday was the deadline to qualify for next week’s debate, and two polls released the day before helped the billionaire former hedge fund executive Tom Steyer slide in at the last minute.
Mr. Steyer had never before exceeded 5 percent in a debate-qualifying poll, but on Thursday, Fox News released polls of voters in Nevada and South Carolina, both states where he has advertised heavily, that found him at 12 percent and 15 percent.
That means the debate stage in Iowa will include six candidates: Mr. Biden, Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren, Mr. Buttigieg, Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Mr. Steyer.
The entrepreneur Andrew Yang is the only candidate who qualified for last month’s debate but not this month’s.
On Friday, Ms. Klobuchar became the latest candidate to release a plan for people with disabilities, an area that is getting more attention than usual. Her plan would, among other things, eliminate the sub-minimum wage, which lets companies pay some people with disabilities just cents an hour; increase Social Security disability payments; and expand home- and community-based services.
For months, Democratic presidential candidates have been building on one another in this arena. Last week, Ms. Warren released a sprawling plan that touched on health care, education, employment and more, earning widespread praise from disability rights advocates.
People with disabilities make up a quarter of the country’s adult population. And more and more, they say, candidates have been listening to their concerns and asking for their help crafting policy.
As Lisa Lerer noted in Thursday’s On Politics newsletter, the comedian Larry David says he’s worried he’ll be stuck impersonating Mr. Sanders on “Saturday Night Live.”
“If he wins, do you know what that’s going to do to my life?” Mr. David said. “It’ll be great for the country, terrible for me.”
Mr. Sanders offered a counterargument when the pair appeared Friday morning on the “Today” show: “I’m giving you a good job for four years, and you’re complaining.”