What’s the Word From Iowa? A Local Reporter Has the Inside Scoop
KNOXVILLE, Iowa — In the week before the Iowa caucuses, the state becomes a crazy place. Everyone wants to know what’s going on, so they ask people like me. I’m a small-town Iowa radio guy on the wrong side of 60 in suspenders, Carhartts and mud boots.
Candidates are everywhere, and media fly in from all over the world to get our stories. For this brief window, every Iowan is an expert. We in the local media draw more attention from our colleagues in the national media because we are paid to pay attention.
In the past week or so, I was booked and then bumped by “Hardball” on MSNBC more times than a petty thief in a county jail holding tank. CNN, too. I understand, it goes with the territory. Besides I don’t really like TV that much. I’m a radio guy. I look old, bald and grumpy on TV, and I’m not grumpy.
Between candidate interviews, media events, my day job, news alerts rattling my phone, tweets falling like rain and relentless email, I try to make sense of what’s happening as we call a wrap on the 2020 Iowa caucuses.
That’s what everyone wants to know. Me, too. I’m lucky to have had long, candid conversations with almost all the candidates — and I’ll especially miss those with Cory Booker, Beto O’Rourke and John Delaney (I do know that they aren’t going to win).
But let’s see. Here’s what I worry about:
Other thoughts: Having interviewed and spoken with both Ms. Klobuchar and Ms. Warren numerous times, one thing I’ve learned is to never underestimate them. They are smart, powerful policy wonks.
Ms. Warren’s supporters in particular are loyal. Her selfie lines have become legend. At the Liberty and Justice event in Des Moines last fall, I watched as she worked through a line of more than 1,000 people (Mr. Sanders and Mr. Biden didn’t bother to hang around).
Ms. Klobuchar is indeed the “girl next door,” and we trust her. Northern Iowa loves her, and her appeal has grown as she has toured our 99 counties. The first time I saw her, she impressed a small crowd in a brewery. The last time, everyone who wanted to see her couldn’t get in.
I wish Senators Booker and Kamala Harris had stayed in the race longer because I believe both would have caucused well, and I admire them. Still, that the top tier of candidates in Iowa includes two women, a Jewish man, a gay man and a man of Asian descent is something we can be proud of.
And the candidates’ staff members have impressed me — too many to name them all, but I must mention Matt Fidel. He’s from Pittsburgh, a former Booker staff member so beloved across numerous counties in Iowa that I’ve bestowed by the power invested in my suspenders the title of “honorary Iowan.” When the Tree of Life mass shooting in Pittsburgh happened in his community, at the synagogue attended by members of his family and friends, he was with us, and we mourned with him.
In recent days, I just about lost track of my life. Take one example from dozens in the past week. I wandered into an event for Tom Steyer in Knoxville, Iowa, looking around for my wife, Annie, and Matt, a friend who’s a farmer. Annie was thinking about caucusing for Mr. Steyer, and Matt was introducing him.
Two guys I had never seen before approached me like we were old drinking buddies. One was as big as a linebacker and laden like a pack mule with saddle bags and a big camera over his shoulder. The other looked like middle-aged villain in a James Bond movie — fit, head shaved bald, week-old whiskers, dressed in black.
They introduced themselves as a TV crew from Belgium that I had agreed to meet. Huh? I agreed to meet a film crew from Belgium? I had no clue. No memory at all. Zip, zilch, nada. But I wasn’t surprised. Le Monde was here to speak with me Saturday, a Dutch film crew Monday, another Dutch crew Thursday, a Japanese crew at the Climate Parade in Des Moines on Saturday, and somewhere, sometime that I forget, another Japanese crew wanted to connect.
I’ll miss the lessons young campaign staff members and embeds teach me. Sam Sergi, an ABC embed and an associate producer of the movie “After Parkland,” is a perfect example. At a Sanders rally in Des Moines that featured the Democratic superstar Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Sam and I went out together to speak with some Trump supporters. A man in his 60s, in a Green Bay Packers jacket, challenged her, pointing at her boots. “Why you wearing those boots — you a farmer?”
She replied, “No … I’m not a farmer.”
“Then why you wearin’ them?”
“Because I like them. Why are you wearing that Green Bay Packer jacket — you play for the Packers?”
He snorted, “No, I don’t play for the Packers …”
She smiled, and said, “Then why are you wearing that jacket?”
“Because I like it?”
“See?” said Sam.
He retreated and hid behind some older ladies. As we walked away, Sam, who’s from Kansas, said: “He doesn’t know anything about farming. These are Tony Llamas, and I’d never wear them in the field!”
That’s another sport for locals in caucus season: I love watching staff members and the press from the big city who tiptoe across farm lots worrying about what they might step in. After stepping in manure, one young women clawed up my back like a cat, screaming a glorious stream of expletives. Another time a woman in capri pants and low shoes was walking very oddly across a field. I asked her what she was doing, and she said she “didn’t like grass touching my ankles.”
One young guy spotted a farm dog, and yelled, “Dog!” as a toddler would, and then giggled and touched and petted it like he had only seen them in picture books before, never in real life.
At the same farm, a nicely dressed young man asked me to inspect a smudge on his shirt. “What’s this?” he asked.
“Dirt,” I replied.
He scrunched up his face. “Dirt? Really? That’s dirt?”
“Yup. Dirt.”
Just a reminder of what awaits the winning Democratic nominee: Last week, I went to the Trump rally in Des Moines. It was brilliant, and he is an extraordinary showman. Over 7,000 people attended, and many more were turned away or watched from a large screen outside, on a 29-degree winter evening.
With every gesture he welcomed the crowd into his open arms, applauded them, showed he was with them. Music blasted in a perfect rite of intensification; enemies were identified, trivialized and vanquished — Creepy Joe, Crazy Bernie, Pete BOOT-EDGE-EDGE and more.
Mr. Trump wove truth, half-truths, hyperbole, exaggeration and lies seamlessly into a vast swirling reality that swept the audience along in an energizing experience as thrilling as an overtime win at the Super Bowl.
And Trump supporters don’t care about impeachment, the lies, any of it — as one man told me in a concession line before the event, he doesn’t care what Trump does, legal or not, because he knows Trump has his back.
Anyway, back to the Democrats. With the results of the caucuses, Iowans will offer to America who they believe best has their back. And then the state becomes flyover country once more.
As I was leaving the Steyer event the other day, I said goodbye to Adam Brewster of CBS and Maura Barrett with NBC. “See you in four years,” I said.
Adam thought for a moment, and then said, “If Iowa is first in the nation in four years!” I thought about it for a moment, and said, “If two old white guys with universal name recognition and high poll numbers before the caucus season even began come out on top in Iowa, maybe we don’t deserve to be first.” I shuffled off, not realizing I had said the quiet part out loud.