Your Tuesday Briefing
As President Trump’s lawyers open the third day of their defense today, an important question hangs over Washington: Will the Republican-controlled Senate agree to hear testimony from witnesses?
Some key Republicans seem to be moving closer to subpoenaing John Bolton, Mr. Trump’s ousted national security adviser, to testify. Their apparent new position comes after The Times revealed that Mr. Bolton wrote in an unpublished manuscript that the president had told him that he wanted to continue freezing $391 million in aid to Ukraine until officials there investigated Democrats.
Trump’s argument: The president’s lawyers maintain that the aid holdup was separate from the requests for investigations, and that he insisted on the investigations out of a concern for corruption in Ukraine.
What’s next: Mr. Bolton has said he would testify at Mr. Trump’s impeachment trial if he were asked to do so. The Senate will vote on whether to call witnesses after Mr. Trump’s legal team wraps up its defense, very likely this week. Here are the latest updates.
Health authorities confirmed today that at least 106 people had died so far from the dangerous coronavirus, a day after Germany reported its first confirmed case. Here’s the latest.
The United States has chartered a flight to repatriate consular staff members and other American citizens today from Wuhan, the Chinese city where the virus originated. France is also planning to evacuate its citizens, who will be required to spend 14 days in quarantine once they’re home.
Related: The virus’s spread has spooked global markets, as investors dump stocks and move into traditional safe havens like gold.
Inside China: Anger has flooded China’s social media over the government’s handling of the crisis, as the outbreak strains the country’s overburdened health system. Some public health experts say China’s efforts to keep tens of millions of people in lockdown in and around Wuhan came too late.
Another angle: Many airlines are accommodating travelers who want to modify, delay or cancel China itineraries. Here’s what to know.
The tiny island of Cyprus, population 850,000, now hosts the most refugees per capita in Europe thanks to a loophole that has made it a magnet for asylum seekers trying to reach the European Union.
More than 11,200 people arrived there last year — a fivefold increase since 2015, when the E.U. and Turkey struck a deal at the height of the migration crisis to close off other routes to the continent. The island, where the north is controlled by Turkey, and the ethnically Greek south by the Republic of Cyprus, was left out of that agreement by default.
What’s happening: Some migrants travel overland to the north, which does not offer asylum or refugee status, wrongly believing that it is linked to mainland Europe or that it belongs to the Schengen zone of passport-free travel. Others travel to southern Cyprus from Lebanon, Syria or Turkey by air or boat.
The background: Cyprus has been divided by a nominal barrier called the green line since the government was overthrown in a coup in 1974.
Quote of note: “I had no idea about the division of Cyprus,” said Clinton Yebga, a Cameroonian refugee. “I just thought, ‘I need to get to Europe, to be safe from harassment.’”
Fans and celebrities around the world are grieving the death of Kobe Bryant, 41, a basketball legend who towered over the sport for more than two decades. Here’s the latest.
Thousands have attended memorials for Bryant, his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, and the seven other people who were aboard a helicopter that crashed on Sunday outside Los Angeles.
The National Basketball Association has postponed a game scheduled for tonight at the home arena of Bryant’s former team, the Los Angeles Lakers. And in Italy, where he lived as a child, the national basketball federation plans to hold a moment of silence during every game this week.
Assessing a tragedy: Sam Dolnick, a Times editor, writes that Bryant’s death “was a devastating reminder that basketball is only a game, and the real world looms closer than you like.”
On the court: Bryant’s genius as an offensive player was that he exhausted opponents before himself, writes Michael Powell, our Sports of The Times columnist.
Complex legacy: A 2003 sexual assault allegation against Bryant changed how many people saw him, but he remained hugely popular.
For years, the Portuguese hacker behind the platform Football Leaks angered teams, agents and soccer regulators by releasing plundered internal documents and secret agreements.
Unbeknown to his critics, the hacker, Rui Pinto, above, was also preparing to leak documents related to Isabel dos Santos, Africa’s richest woman and the daughter of Angola’s former president.
She may now face charges of embezzlement. Mr. Pinto’s lawyers say it’s all thanks to their client, who was arrested in Budapest and extradited to Portugal last year.
Libya: Fighting and arms shipments have resumed amid the collapse of a cease-fire in the country’s civil war, just days after world leaders met in Germany to broker a truce.
Huawei: Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain is scheduled to meet senior ministers today to decide whether to ban or restrict equipment made by the Chinese telecom giant Huawei. He has faced pressure from the United States to ban Huawei outright, but is expected to grant the company a limited role in Britain’s 5G network.
Auschwitz: A ceremony on Monday commemorated the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, the Nazi death camp in German-occupied Poland. Before the allied forces could arrive, tens of thousands of weakened prisoners were forced to march in the dead of winter, with an estimated 15,000 shot or dying of cold, hunger and illness.
Snapshot: Alessandro Michele, above center, the lead designer of Gucci. He is among the celebrities fighting a proposed geothermal plant in the Umbria region of Italy on environmental grounds.
In memoriam: Michou, 88, who ran France’s most celebrated drag cabaret and dressed habitually in blue, died in Paris on Sunday.
Influencers: More and more people are turning their personal lives into full-time careers on social media. What happens when their friends don’t want to be co-stars?
What we’re reading: This piece on Gwyneth Paltrow’s new Netflix series, “The Goop Lab.” Our television critic James Poniewozik calls it a “great debut” for The New Yorker’s new TV critic, Doreen St. Félix.
Cook: A quick Italian wedding soup with turkey meatballs is a flavor-packed weeknight meal.
Go: An exhibition at the Museo Reina Sofía in Madrid of paintings by the artist Ceija Stojka that depict her ordeal in the Holocaust.
Read: Our roundup of the best and worst moments from Sunday night’s Grammy Awards. (Aerosmith and Run-D.M.C. made a glorious mess.)
Smarter Living: Because small luxuries are sometimes the most essential, we have a guide to shopping for bathmats.
For some British readers, news of travel restrictions intended to stop the spread of a deadly virus in central China might have brought to mind a somewhat incongruous image: a village in the English Peak District, where the wells are decorated with flowers each summer.
This village, Eyam, became a symbol of self-sacrifice because of its role in England’s last major outbreak of bubonic plague, in 1665.
That autumn, plague-bearing fleas arrived in Eyam in a bale of cloth from London. As deaths began to mount, the rector of the village church, William Mompesson, gathered the villagers and asked them to quarantine themselves to stop the infection from spreading.
Further encouraged by the previous rector, Thomas Stanley, the villagers agreed, and stuck by their agreement, even as whole families died. (Mr. Mompesson survived, apparently against his expectations, but his wife, Catherine, did not.)
When the outbreak ended the following November, 260 people in Eyam had died — by most accounts, that was more than half of the population.
But the lives they saved, in villages and larger towns nearby, almost certainly numbered in the thousands.