Pelosi Taps Diverse Team of Impeachment Managers With Legal Credentials
WASHINGTON — All but one of them come with legal experience, whether gleaned from evening law courses or honed while winning the conviction of an F.B.I. agent who was seduced by a Soviet spy and traded secrets for cash and gold.
Two have served in Congress for more than a quarter century, while another two have just finished their first year there.
In selecting the seven lawmakers who will serve as managers of the impeachment case against President Trump, Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California turned to a diverse team from her Democratic caucus with an array of litigation credentials. Its task, which officially began on Wednesday as the House voted to appoint them, is to prosecute the case for removal of a president in only the third such trial in American history.
“The emphasis is on comfort level in the courtroom,” Ms. Pelosi said Wednesday at a news conference to announce her choices, hours before the House voted to ratify them. “The emphasis is making the strongest possible case to protect and defend our Constitution, to seek the truth for the American people.”
The group also reflects the historic diversity of the House Democrats, with two African-Americans, a Latina and three women.
“The gorgeous mosaic of the House Democratic caucus is represented by its racial, its gender, its regional, its ideological and its religious diversity,” said Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, who with the other managers flanked Ms. Pelosi at her news conference Wednesday morning in a studio in the Capitol. “That is what we saw onstage.”
It offered a vivid contrast with the group of managers who prosecuted President Bill Clinton during the Senate’s last impeachment trial in 1999, a team of 13 white men.
Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, which led the investigation into charges that Mr. Trump pressured Ukraine to help his re-election campaign, will be the lead prosecutor. Mr. Schiff and Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, were unsurprising choices to present the case against Mr. Trump, given their public roles in the inquiry and drafting of impeachment articles.
And on Wednesday, it fell to Mr. Nadler, who earned his law degree by attending evening courses while serving in the New York State Assembly, to oversee Wednesday’s debate on the resolution that formally approved the impeachment managers, allowing the articles of impeachment to be sent to the Senate. Behind him sat Ms. Pelosi, Mr. Schiff and the other managers: Mr. Jeffries, Representatives Val B. Demings of Florida, Jason Crow of Colorado, Zoe Lofgren of California and Sylvia R. Garcia of Texas.
Ms. Lofgren is the sole House Democrat to have participated in the past three presidential impeachment processes, having worked as a committee aide during the proceedings against Richard M. Nixon and served on the Judiciary Committee during the impeachment of Bill Clinton. And while Ms. Demings does not have a formal background as a lawyer, she was the first woman to be police chief of Orlando, Fla., and sits on both the Intelligence and Judiciary Committees, giving her a prominent perch to participate in the impeachment inquiry.
The two freshmen lawmakers named to the group, Ms. Garcia and Mr. Crow, both bring critical perspectives for the arguments to remove Mr. Trump. Ms. Garcia, one of the first two Latina women to represent Texas in Congress, was a former judge, while Mr. Crow, a former Army ranger and litigator, is considered an authority on national security matters, which are at the heart of the Democratic argument for Mr. Trump’s removal.  
And Mr. Schiff, a former federal prosecutor in Los Angeles who secured the conviction against the F.B.I. agent, won his seat by defeating James E. Rogan, a Republican who had served as an impeachment manager in the 1999 Clinton trial. In a quirk of history, Mr. Rogan’s predecessor had also worked on an impeachment inquiry, into the Watergate break-in that led to Nixon’s resignation.
Ms. Pelosi began conducting individual meetings with lawmakers this month to gauge their interest in the role of manager, according to a person familiar with the meetings but not authorized to discuss them publicly. She called most of the group on Tuesday to inform them of their selection, and then met with the full group privately Wednesday morning.
“This is all about protecting the Constitution,” Ms. Demings told reporters as she left the news conference. “I’ve taken four oaths in my lifetime — two as a law enforcement officer and two here — and I take them very, very seriously.”
With only two presidential impeachment trials to serve as a guide, it is up to the group of seven to determine how they will divide the responsibilities. During the Clinton trial, lawmakers spent their two-week holiday break carefully drafting speeches and arguments, splitting up the delivery of opening and closing arguments as well as a breakdown of the articles of impeachment themselves. This group has far less time to prepare, with opening arguments likely to begin next week.
The managers huddled behind closed doors Wednesday afternoon, but most lawmakers would not say what they discussed.
When asked how the work would be divided among the seven, Mr. Nadler answered, “Appropriately.”
Hours later, the managers flanked Ms. Pelosi as she used a handful of pens to formally sign the articles of impeachment. They then marched through the Capitol Rotunda to the Senate chamber, arriving at the ornately decorated double doors to deliver the charges they will soon argue against the president.
