Fire at Los Angeles High-Rise Injures 13 People
Some residents were hanging out of windows. Some fled to the roof. And 13 people were injured, one gravely, after an intense fire broke out in a 25-story high-rise building in Los Angeles on Wednesday morning, the authorities said.
In all, 15 people who scurried to the roof were rescued by helicopters, Capt. Erik Scott, a spokesman with the Los Angeles Fire Department, said at a news conference. Among those injured was a man who had threatened to jump from a window ledge, Captain Scott said. He was in critical condition.
“Our firefighters immediately got on their public address loudspeakers, were able to calm that individual down and were able to place an aerial ladder up there and have an effective rescue,” Captain Scott said.
Of the 13 people injured, seven were taken to hospitals, including a 3-month-old. Most were treated for smoke inhalation, Captain Scott said. Two firefighters were also treated for minor burns. A 30-year-old man in grave condition was the worst injured. He was found on the seventh floor, where the fire broke out.
The authorities said they were investigating whether the fire at Barrington Plaza, a 25-story building near Wilshire Boulevard, on the city’s west side, was intentionally set.
Justin Eisenberg, deputy chief of operations for the Los Angeles Police Department’s West Bureau, said 50 officers were on the scene to determine “whether this is a crime or not.”
He said the police had not identified any suspects or made any arrests.
“It’s very, very early in this investigation,” Chief Eisenberg said. “Right now, we don’t know if we have an arson or an accidental fire. It’s very premature at this time.”
The blaze broke out at around 8:30 a.m. and was fueled by 35-mile-an-hour gusts of wind. The complex had 339 residents living in 240 units.
The flames were so intense at one point that they forced firefighters to leave the building and battle the blaze until it was cool enough for them to re-enter.
Witnesses told CBS News 8 that they could see people inside the building through the windows, apparently waiting to be rescued. Some had evacuated to the roof. Live television footage showed one man inching sideways along the windows on the outside of the building as firefighters extended a ladder to him.
The Los Angeles Fire Department said about 335 firefighters were involved in the rescue-and-response effort, which succeeded in extinguishing the fire after about 90 minutes.
“This certainly could have been a lot worse, with 240 units, multiple people living in those units,” Captain Scott said. “Firefighters did an outstanding job.”
After the fire was put out, arson investigators and detectives descended on the complex to comb through debris, look at burn patterns and talk to witnesses, Captain Scott said.
Initially, the authorities were investigating whether the fire was connected to another fire that started about 6:30 a.m. at a different high-rise building several blocks away.
But by Wednesday evening, investigators had determined that the earlier fire was accidental and caused by welding at the building, Capt. Randall Goddard of the Los Angeles Police Department, said.
“So the two fires are not connected whatsoever,” he added.
Barrington Plaza did not have sprinklers and, because of its age, was not required to have them, Captain Scott said. The complex was built in 1961, he said.
Captain Scott said the authorities were also investigating whether the building’s smoke alarms were working, and added, “So far we have no indication that they were not functioning.”