What to Cook This Weekend
Good morning. It’s Super Bowl weekend, San Francisco playing Kansas City in Miami, and fans are hoping for grace in the backfield, a few decent ads and something wild from Jennifer Lopez and Shakira, who will lead the halftime show.
Also, chicken wings. I’ve been making this smoked version for a long time, a kind of reverse-sear situation. But I like this newer recipe for oven-baked Buffalo wings (above) a great deal for wintertime, when I don’t want to cook outside. Want to get fancy? An overnight yuzu brine makes these fried Sriracha wings outrageously good. (The cucumber cream helps as well.) Or you could make David Tanis’s amazing recipe for spicy lacquered wings, and serve them on a bed of sliced oranges. That is an amazing meal.
Will you make chili this weekend? Gumbo? I love this chili gumbo mash-up I learned from a Louisiana fireman named Jeremy Chauvin. It’s excellent couch-eating fare, alongside some cornbread. So is a platter of loaded nachos, as it happens. And, after that, a platter of Priya Krishna’s Indian-ish nachos with Cheddar, black beans and chutney.
Dips make the cut this weekend absolutely: my clam dip, for instance, and Melissa Clark’s Cheddar-scallion dip; Alison Roman’s spinach artichoke dip; the Store’s green dip; Ali Slagle’s creamy goat cheese, bacon and date dip; in fact, all the dips.
First quarter guacamole con frutas? Second quarter fried chicken? Halftime ice cream sandwiches? You get the picture. We have dozens and dozens of recipes for the Super Bowl. Amid them, I hope you will find your bliss. (Pizza!)
Of course, we have a lot more than dude food on NYT Cooking. Yotam Ottolenghi’s recipe for a pistachio and rosewater semolina cake suggests as much. Yewande Komolafe’s recipe for fish pepper soup proves it plain. Yes, you need a subscription to access the site. But we’ll give you a lot in return: the recipes, naturally, and the ability to save and organize them, to send yourself grocery lists, to learn how to make soufflé.
Come visit us on Facebook as long as you’re online. You can find us on Instagram and Twitter, too. And look who’s back on YouTube with a brand-new video recipe! It’s Alison Roman cooking a spicy white bean stew with broccoli rabe. We’re calling that recipe #thestewpoint0.
Please write if you run into trouble with your cooking or our technology. We are standing by the inbox always: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Someone will get back to you, I promise.
Now, it’s nothing to do with plums or oregano, but here’s Mike Mariani in T, writing about a new generation of intentional communities — communes, basically. You should read that.
Peter Kaminsky is in Anglers Journal this month with an article about the chef Ned Baldwin, who’d rather be fishing.
I’ve been thinking a lot about what constitutes an artistic use of Twitter. It’s not long rants, nor simple comedy. At its best, it must use the form to raise the work. Imogen West-Knights’s recent search for a name for a particular, British male stereotype is a good example. So is Peter Stevenson’s use of photographs.
Finally, I know I’m late to all the trend-forecasting that happened across the internet at the end of December. It just took me a little while to figure out the state of play. I’m calling it now. This is going to be the year of the flattop griddle. Shio koji marinades are going to be huge. Clams will rise in the estimation of raw-bar aficionados. And I’m rating seitan futures as a BUY. See you on Sunday.