What to Cook This Week
Good morning. Here’s what you ought to make today, even if dinner’s going to be bacon-wrapped jalapeño poppers, fully loaded queso (above) and a half-rack of jerk ribs: blender-made chocolate mousse.
Tejal Rao wrote about the dessert for The Times this week. It’s an old Junior League recipe that’s made the rounds of restaurant kitchens and been tweaked and tweaked into easily prepared deliciousness. You may wish to put yours in chilled ramekins as if you were serving them at a country club (no judgment!), but Tejal suggests something larger and more communal: “a big bowl going around, again and again, the portions never uniform or predetermined.” Pass the Super Bowl, kid!
For Monday, I’m thinking, you could make takeout-style sesame noodles, with extra peanuts strewn across the top for protein and crunch, and extra cucumber, too. Serve with very, very cold yellow beer, and pretend it’s August somewhere.
On Tuesday, you should set up this mushroom-Parmesan tart so you can take it for lunch on Wednesday. No? At least make this Grecian chicken stew with cauliflower and olives for dinner. (Follow the crowd of readers who noted they roast the cauliflower first — bigger flavor!)
Wednesday night seems like a good one for pork cutlets with lemon and capers. It’s not a precisely unsplattery dish to make, but it’s not difficult, doesn’t take long and is powerfully delicious.
I like Ali Slagle recipes on Thursday nights, so maybe this new one for a baked pasta Alfredo with broccoli rabe and lemon, just to keep up the citrusy vibe? Or, failing that, try this new one for stuffed shells, a classic of the Italian-American kitchen.
And then I’ll round out the week with family choice: a pot of bo kho, the Vietnamese braised beef stew; or one of Trini-style chana and aloo, a chickpea and potato curry.
Many thousands more recipes to cook this week are waiting for you on NYT Cooking. It is true that you need a subscription to access them. But you get a lot in return: the recipes, of course, and the ability to save and organize them, to send yourself grocery lists, to learn how to make pizza.
Please visit us on Facebook some time. There’s a cool NYT Cooking community group over there. We are on Instagram and Twitter, as well. YouTube? Yes, of course, we have a YouTube channel. We’re not Boomers! Did you see we had Jamie Oliver over to cook a veggie burger?
We are standing by just in case something goes wrong with a recipe, or with our technology, or with your cooking. Just write: cookingcare@nytimes.com. We will get back to you. And if you want to launch a rocket (or send some virtual flowers)? Hit me. It’s my job to take incoming fire: foodeditor@nytimes.com. I read every message sent.
Now, it’s quite a distance from the pressure cooker and your best paring knife, but I think you ought to be reading “Interior Chinatown,” by Charles Yu.
I enjoyed this Guardian dive into what fonts writers use to write. (Me, I’m 12-point Times New Roman, ride or die.)
My pal Sam Sanders hipped me to the Paradise Cove trailer park in Malibu, Calif., and this awesome kitchen and backyard situation there.
Finally, if you missed it on the Grammys last week — viewership was down — here’s Tyler, the Creator to play us off, “Earfquake/New Magic Wand.” I’ll be back tomorrow.