$750,000 Homes in Mississippi, Missouri and Arizona
Adapted from Allison Ramsey Architects’ cottage plans, this home was constructed in 2019 by its owner, who is also the listing agent. It is 10 minutes on foot from the University of Mississippi campus and Courthouse Square, the historic heart of Oxford and the location of what is said to be the oldest department store in the South (Neilson’s, founded in 1839). Stone Park, with its new activity center, and the Oxford Depot Trail, a biking and pedestrian thoroughfare that was once a stretch of the Mississippi Central Railroad, are two blocks away.
Size: 2,529 square feet
Price per square foot: $297
Indoors: The front door takes you into room with shiplap-clad walls and bleached engineered hardwood floors. On the left is the living area, which centers on a gas fireplace. On the right is the kitchen, which has an island with seating, quartz countertops and a Smeg oven and hood. Floating shelves and glass-fronted upper cabinets lend a clean feeling to this room and the adjacent dining area. Beyond it are a pantry, study and laundry room.
Straight ahead of the front door, beyond a staircase with metal cable railing, is a master suite. The bedroom is decorated with metallic cork wallpaper; the bathroom includes a natural-stone-trough double sink and a wet room: a glassed-in area with a soaking tub, rain shower head and hand-held sprayer. The walk-in closet is fitted with storage from the Container Store.
The second floor has two carpeted guest rooms, each with a walk-in closet with custom organization and an en suite bathroom. There is also a media room with a sliding barn door and climate-controlled storage, and a bonus room that could be put to any number of uses.
Outdoor space: The house has a covered front porch and a small rear deck that steps down to a brick patio and the yard. Garden beds surround a lawn and could be planted with evergreens for privacy in place of a fence. Parking is in a rear carport.
Taxes: $4,000 (estimated)
Contact: Betsy Patton, Matthews Real Estate, 662-801-4502; iproperty.com.my
This home is just a few blocks uphill from Country Club Plaza, a historic shopping center with Spanish-style buildings, whose holiday-season lights are visible from the property’s roof deck. The nine-acre Westwood Park is a five-minute walk west, and the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art is a mile and a half east. The owners recently freshened all the interior paint and installed new carpet.
Size: 3,632 square feet
Price per square foot: $203
Indoors: The three-story house puts social and private spaces on the main level, minimizing the number of stairs occupants need to climb. The open-plan layout centers on a living-and-dining room with a floor-to-ceiling window, a white-painted brick wood-burning fireplace and a beamed ceiling. A partial wall of bookshelves blocks the view of the staircase; beyond it is an eat-in kitchen lined in floating wood lower cabinets with cultured-stone countertops and laminate upper cabinets. Penny-round tile covers the backsplashes. The breakfast area opens to a backyard deck built around an oak tree. The floors throughout these rooms are stained hardwood.
The three carpeted bedrooms on this level include a master with direct access to the backyard deck. The master bathroom has double sinks in a concrete-and-wood vanity. There is also a laundry room.
Upstairs is an office with red linoleum flooring and access to the roof deck. On the walkout lower level, the owners removed one of two garages and created a bedroom, a full bathroom and a rec room. This section has a private exterior entrance and could be rented.
Outdoor space: The spacious roof deck has wood fencing around the perimeter and built-in benches. Parking is in the remaining two-car garage at the home’s base.
Taxes: $2,333
Contact: David Costello, RE/MAX Premier Realty, 816-591-3186; remax.com
This one-story stucco-clad house with a clay-tile roof is in West Sedona, less than a mile below stores, services and entertainment along Route 89A. The property of more than three-quarters of an acre is planted with mature trees and has red-rock views. The house is unusual in the area, as it is not governed by a homeowners’ association; a casita could be added and rented out for any length of time.
Size: 2,601 square feet
Price per square foot: $279
Indoors: A living room with a vaulted ceiling and travertine floor includes a wall of glass, providing access to a rear patio. In a corner is a kiva fireplace with a granite-topped travertine hearth. A dining area flows off the opposite side of this room, with French doors opening to another patio. It connects to an upgraded kitchen with oak cabinets, granite countertops, a mobile island and a windowed breakfast bay. Among the appliances are a double wall oven and a Viking cooktop.
The master suite includes a walk-in closet and a private terrace with a trellis woven with wisteria vines. The master bathroom has double sinks, a jetted soaking tub and a glass-walled shower. The two guest bedrooms are on the opposite side of the home and share a hall bathroom. There is also a laundry room between the attached two-car garage and the kitchen.
Outdoor space: The four patios, one on each side of the house, open the living space to the surrounding nature and the wildlife that wanders by: Elk, deer, javelina and more than 30 bird species have been observed by the owners.
Taxes: $4,100
Contact: Denise Thomas Garlan, Russ Lyon Sotheby’s International Realty, 928-399-9616; russlyon.com