What Made Virginia Change Its Mind on Guns?
MIDLOTHIAN, Va. — Lisette Johnson had been a lifelong Republican. She became an activist on gun safety after she was shot by her estranged husband more than a decade ago, and she asked her Republican state senator for his backing on gun control bills.
“I thought everyone would be on board with this, like, what objection could they possibly have?” Ms. Johnson said. “But it became very clear that the people interested in this were not the people I had aligned myself with, who were Republicans.”
Her senator voted against gun limits, and in November, Ms. Johnson was among the residents of her central Virginia district who helped turn that traditionally Republican legislative seat over to a Democrat as part of a wave that flipped both legislative chambers and handed Democrats control in Virginia for the first time in 25 years.
On Thursday, Virginia Democrats pushed through a sweeping package of gun restrictions that have angered gun rights activists around the nation, prompting a massive pro-gun rally in Richmond this month and spurring counties in Virginia and elsewhere to declare themselves as Second Amendment sanctuaries.
Along mostly party-line votes, the state’s House of Delegates approved seven measures, including limiting handgun purchases to one each month, requiring background checks for all firearms sales and transfers, and imposing a “red flag” law, which allows the confiscation of guns from people deemed by courts to be dangerous to themselves or others. Earlier this month, the Senate, split largely along party lines, approved four gun limits, including limiting handgun purchases, allowing municipalities to ban guns in certain public areas, and background checks.
Gov. Ralph Northam, a Democrat, has said he will sign gun restrictions, which would still require redrafting next month to reconcile different language from the two chambers before final legislative passage.
This stretch of land near Richmond, which is one of two State Senate seats Democrats won from Republicans last fall, is a microcosm of a rapidly changing Virginia, with a simultaneously shifting array of views on guns. The district extends from the rural, wooded countryside of Powhatan County to the suburbs of northern Chesterfield County, and to neighborhoods in Richmond that have some of the nation’s highest urban poverty rates.
This district includes a wide mix of beliefs and voters. Recent voting patterns show that parts of it, like Powhatan County, which makes up the western portion of the district, are strong Republican territory. Chesterfield County, in the middle of the district, leans Republican. And Richmond, the state capital, is nearly solid Democratic turf.
But in recent years, the district has tilted leftward as once rural areas of Chesterfield County have been developed into housing that attracts young professionals. The newcomers often have brought different, more liberal political sensibilities, becoming a potent force on gun safety issues. And some suburban women, even longer-term residents of the district like Ms. Johnson, who now considers herself a Democrat, have changed their opinions on gun control or increasingly seen gun limits as central to their political outlook.
In November, that tilt became clear with the election of Ghazala Hashmi, the Democrat who won the State Senate seat with 54 percent of the vote. She defeated Glen Sturtevant Jr., a Republican incumbent who had been endorsed by the National Rifle Association.
“I think women especially have realized they have a strong opportunity to make political change,” Ms. Hashmi said. “For me, I felt not just a deflation of expectation when gun safety laws weren’t passed last summer, but I also noticed there was a more general feeling going around that enough is enough — we’ve given these folks every opportunity to give the public what they want.”
In interviews this week with about two dozen people who live in her Senate district, many said they supported restrictions on firearms to prevent gun violence, including suicides. But opinions varied, often significantly, depending on which portion of the district the voter lived in.
Powhatan County is only a 45-minute drive from Richmond but can feel much further away, with its forested fields and hawks circling overhead. There, people said lawmakers in Richmond had gone too far.
Some said they fear that gun control measures being weighed in the state capital in recent days were a prelude to the government seizing all firearms. “What I see is that people want to control something they’re afraid of, or they don’t understand,” said Jean Gannon, Powhatan County’s Republican Party chairwoman. “This is just the beginning because the ultimate goal is to take guns from people.”
At the root of this district’s — and Virginia’s — political transition is a slow-moving demographic change, a new kind of suburbanization that is sweeping through national politics. From Atlanta to Houston, this pattern is repeating itself — suburban housing developments gobbling up rural areas and farmland and lifting Democrats to power.
Expanding suburbs in the Richmond area, for instance, have meant that Powhatan County, which has been among the most dependably Republican counties in the state, now has a Walmart — and Republicans are sometimes challenged for local office.
In Chesterfield County, new jobs at Amazon, Honeywell and Capital One have boosted population and intensified the county’s political transformation. Demographers say that newcomers, many of whom have moved from outside the state, have helped swell the population to nearly 350,000 from 76,000 in 1970.
That growth mirrors a population boom in the state. Virginia’s population has risen by 38 percent since 1990, with the biggest growth in densely settled suburban areas.
The changes have prompted deep anxiety in rural places. Just 24 percent of Virginians lived in rural areas in 2010, down from 47 percent in 1950, according to census data.
In only three months, more than 100 municipalities and counties — nearly all of them in rural areas of the state — have declared themselves Second Amendment sanctuaries. The designation carries no legal weight, but it has become a way for local officeholders to make clear their discontent over efforts to limit guns.
“I get that people are uncomfortable with guns, but the Constitution says I have a right to have them,” said Steve Jenkins, 55, a Republican who lives in Powhatan County and supported that county’s sanctuary designation.
The state’s historical support for limiting restrictions on firearms ownership has been bolstered by the N.R.A., which is based in the state’s northern suburbs. The group has spent millions of dollars lobbying and making campaign contributions to state and local officeholders, according to the nonpartisan Virginia Public Access Project.
In recent months, efforts to pass new restrictions were boosted by suburban women concerned about the safety of their children in school and national gun control organizations that poured money into state legislative races.
“We knew how important this issue was to our families, and we knew if we didn’t start making this a single issue, we can’t win,” said Geena Reeder, a Democrat and member of Liberal Women of Chesterfield County, which formed after the 2016 election of President Trump, and has pressed for gun safety measures.
But the election of Ms. Hashmi and her support of gun control laws has only deepened political divisions in Chesterfield County.
The county board of supervisors — which has a Republican majority — approved a statement this month supporting the Second Amendment, though it stopped short of declaring itself a Second Amendment sanctuary. A portion of the county is also represented by Amanda Chase, a Republican state senator who sometimes attends legislative sessions with a sidearm.
“It’s not really about guns,” said Don Via Jr., who describes himself as a political independent who lives in Chesterfield County. “It’s about a person’s intrinsic right to defend themselves from burglars — or God forbid, the government, although no one wants to see that happen.”
In the more densely packed, urban Richmond portion of the Senate district, gun crime is a continuing problem.
“The folks in the rural areas love their guns, and the folks in the suburbs are concerned about their kids in school,” said Richard Walker, a Democrat who lives in Richmond. “But the folks in the neighborhoods are worried about what happens when they walk out the door. People can walk out of their house and get an illegal gun because there are so many out there.”
Gun violence in Richmond increased by 32 percent in 2019, according to the Richmond police, including 59 homicides — eight more than 2018.
Ms. Reeder said that the fight over guns now playing out in the state capital is an indication that Virginia is in the midst of a political recalculation that has been brewing for years. Tough new gun measures, she predicted, will ultimately be accepted.
“We’re going to have some growing pains, but that’s O.K.,” she said. “It’s going to be fine.”