The Murder of a Ballerina
ISTANBUL — On Dec. 3, Ceren Ozdemir, a 20-year-old ballerina, spent most of her evening teaching ballet to children at a school in Ordu, a beautiful town on Turkey’s Black Sea coast. She walked home from the school and rang the bell at her building’s entrance. Her sister appeared at a window and tossed down the keys. When her sister noticed a man approach Ms. Ozdemir, she ran downstairs to check things out.
Ms. Ozdemir picked up the keys and opened the building door. “Excuse me!” the man said. “Do you know if a person named Metin lives in this building?” She turned around to reply. “When she turned back to face me, I stabbed her twice and ran,” Ozgur Arduc, a 36-year-old from Amasya, a town about 170 miles from Ordu, recalled after he confessed to following her home and stabbing her.
Mr. Arduc, who had recently escaped from a prison where he was serving a sentence for attempting to murder a child in 2015, spoke about following various women with the intention of killing them. He attacked Ms. Ozdemir as he felt she was “a skinny person” that he could kill easily. A few hours after the assault, she died in a hospital after surgery. On Dec. 20, Mr. Arduc was convicted of her murder by a court in Ordu and sentenced to 45 years in prison.
Ms. Ozdemir, an undergraduate student in Ordu University’s Department of Fine Arts, had wanted to become a ballerina from a very young age. “Ceren started taking ballet classes when she turned 8,” her father, Yilmaz Ozdemir, recalled. She trained hard for nine years and started teaching ballet at a school in 2017. She was also keen on acting. “She wanted to be a star,” her father sighed.
Instead, she was among the 474 femicides — murders of women by men because they are women, as the World Health Organization defines it — in Turkey in 2019, according to We Will End Femicide Platform, a women’s rights group. According to the data analyzed by the group, murders of women in Turkey have steadily increased in the past decade. Between 2008 and 2017, according to Platform, 2,025 women were murdered by men in Turkey, the number of killings rising significantly around 2013.
A recent report on femicides by the Turkish Gendarmerie, a federal law enforcement agency, largely substantiates the claims made by the women’s group. Between 2008 and 2017, the Gendarmerie revealed that 2,487 women were killed, and it also showed a significant increase in the number of killings after 2013. A majority of the women — 62 percent — were killed by their husbands, ex-husbands or boyfriends; 28 percent by other relatives; and a smaller proportion — 10 percent — by stalkers, neighbors or others.
In the past two decades, Turkey urbanized rapidly and saw immense migration from the villages to the cities. The transformation also brought women greater opportunities for work, leisure and social mobility. But many Turkish men failed to accept the possibilities and prominence in the public space that the economic and social transformation were offering to women. Most women killed by their husbands, fathers or brothers were killed because they insisted on their own choices in marriage, work, clothing and appearance.
In 2011, Turkey lead the ratification of the Istanbul Convention, a Council of Europe accord on gender equality and preventing violence against women. And the country followed it up by passing a law to protect women in 2012.
But politicians associated with the ruling Justice and Development Party government also espoused regressive positions such as pushing a debate on whether adultery should be a criminal offense, describing abortion as tantamount to “murder” and describing women who prefer working outside the home to maternity as “half persons.” In November 2014, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan claimed that women are not equal to men because of biological differences, and he has, on several occasions, called on Turkish families to have “at least three children.”
After the national outrage following Ms. Ozdemir’s murder, the Interior Ministry introduced a ruling requiring training security forces and the confiscation of licensed guns from men accused of domestic violence and from men against whom courts have issued restraining orders.
But the crisis cannot be tackled merely by enacting new legislation. Existing laws must be enforced, and the police need to respond efficiently and seriously to calls for help from women. In 2016, according to a report by a group of gender experts at the Council of Europe, 55,757 women applied for state protection after facing domestic violence, but only 9,429 of those women were provided shelter.
According to Turkish law, the applications of women seeking protection from violence are to be handled within 24 hours by the courts without requiring any evidence. The court may restrain a man accused of domestic violence from visiting the family house or the children’s school up to six months. It may restrict his communication with family members and confiscate his licensed gun. If he violates the order, he may be imprisoned.
A woman and her children may be settled in a shelter affiliated with the government, local administrations or a nongovernmental organization. Without protective measures, economic support and psychological support, restraining orders are mere pieces of paper, often found in the bags of women murdered in Turkey.
Sentences meted out to perpetrators of violence against women are often lenient, and judges regularly reduce their jail terms. Quite frequently, the sentences are reduced simply on the basis of an accused or convicted man’s appearance. Men who wear neckties and suits during their court appearances get their sentences reduced so often that Turks have coined a phrase for the phenomenon: “tie reduction.”
Turkey also needs to confront and reform the practice of the conditional release of men accused of domestic violence. The authorities do not inform victims when they release men who were arrested or detained for domestic violence. Last month, a man who was on a short release from an open prison with permission from the authorities stabbed his wife 20 times and then surrendered to the police.
On the streets of Ordu, women are making the choice between fear and freedom in the aftermath of the Ceren Ozdemir murder. In an interview with a Turkish journalist, the murdered ballerina’s sister, Gizem, spoke about not being able to leave the house, being afraid of going to the bathroom alone and fearing that someone is following her. “I see that man’s face in other people’s faces,” she said. “I cannot look at other people’s faces anymore.”
Friends and family of the slain woman fear that Ordu, a liberal city where women once felt safe dressing up and being out late at night on their own, might be turning inward in fear.
“I look around when I walk on my own,” Ayse Turkmen Akkas, also a ballet teacher and a university friend of Ceren Ozdemir, told me. “Nowadays, everybody is paranoid about being stalked, but we have to continue living and resist the fear and the pressure.”