What Students Are Saying About Military Service, School Textbooks and Stargazing
This week’s roundup of student comments on our writing prompts showcased vibrant opinions and discussions. In our most-commented-on prompts, we asked young people to tell us whether they’d ever considered joining the United States military, as well as what they thought about their school textbooks and their place in the cosmos.
Before we get to this week’s comments, we want to offer a warm welcome to new classes from  Apopka, Fla.; Fountain Valley High School; South Africa; and Upper Merion High School.
Please note: Student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear exactly as they were originally submitted.
_________
In “Who Signs Up to Fight? Makeup of U.S. Recruits Shows Glaring Disparity,” Dave Philipps and Tim Arango report on the demographics of American men and women who sign up for military service, noting that those who enlist overwhelmingly come from counties in the South as well as communities near military bases.
We asked students whether they would consider serving in the armed forces and about their views and attitudes toward the military. We heard from a wide range of students, from those with staunch antiwar positions to those who plan to enlist imminently.
I have already considered and made a decision that I do want to serve in the armed forces when I am eligible. Since I live in the South, I do see more of a support for the military than in other places I have been or lived in. I think that this article definitely confirms what I have thought before. I am very supportive of the military, and service as a whole. My father serves in the Navy, so I know many people who are serving or have served before which shapes my view to be very supportive of these people and their decisions to serve. I also believe that it is a very selfless decision to make to serve many people that you don’t know to protect the freedom that our country gives us.
— Blake, Atlanta
I myself have always wanted to be a soldier from a young age. My plan is to join up after college so I can first get a degree for after life in the military. It’s difficult to explain to other why I want to serve and fight for my country to others but I know in myself that it’s all I’ve ever wanted in life. As tensions continue to rise with Iran I am starting to see my peers talk about military service more often as many believed that we were going to war. I personally have no trouble joining up but I acknowledge the fact that my opinion on this topic is very unpopular throughout my generation.
— Dylan Cafferty, Glenbard West, Glen Ellyn, IL
… I have actually taken the preliminary steps in joining United States Naval Academy. For as long as I can remember, the strict discipline and determination that service members behold have inspired the way I grow up and interact with the world. My father was the first in his family to graduate from a university, earning a degree in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Michigan. His military-like hard work and determination has never let him down in life — which he never lets me forget — so naturally, I picked up some of those characteristics within him.
— Braden Spiech, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn, IL
I plan on joining the National Guard when I am 17. We had a speaker come into one of my classes one time, and his talk made me want to join. I’ve always wanted to do something to help people, and with the Guard, that is exactly what I would be doing. They also help pay for tuition and fees when you go to college. I think that everyone should at least consider joining the Armed Forces, even if you are thinking you don’t want too.
— Perry Troutman, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
Although joining the army is an honor, it has never been my passion. My great uncle was drafted for Vietnam and I’ve gotten the privilege to hear first hand what war up is like. It’s filled with violence that I don’t believe I could mentally handle. My uncle loved it though. He loved that he got an opportunity to help people and improve the world. I want to follow his purpose but into a different career. My goal is to become a nurse to help people go back to their own lives and feel touched by the help I gave them. I never really had an interest in the army, but I have very high respect for anyone who wants to enlist.
— Anna Wince, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn
I have some family who have served in the military, and it doesn’t seem like the life for me. This sounds selfish, but I don’t want to risk my life for war, conflict, or even patriotism. Why should I fight for the government’s cause that I may not even believe in?
— Charlotte G., J.R. Masterman School
I would consider serving because it comes with many benefits. After you are done serving there are many things that you don’t have to worry about like health insurance, if you have a house you don’t have to worry about payments, and they cover certain bills. There are so many benefits after you serve. You get experience and training for going into the military. You also get paid for training.
— Armando, Romo
Many people try to find purpose in life through religion and their career, but going to the military is a supreme role in society because your purpose is to keep the American population’s freedom to find their own purpose in the world. The military is a special thing that people should cherish because it protects us and our lives.
— Sophia Fitzgerald, Battle Ground Academy
I do think that enlisting in the military is a great option if you do not want to have a lot of college debt to pay off and because there are health benefits, even though you have to wake up before the sun and keep up with the rest of your life. It must take a lot of grit and organization to be in the military and attend school at the same time.
— MC, Masterman
I feel that being apart of the military is the most patriotic thing possible to do for your country, because service members are literally going into the military voluntarily, and risking their lives.
— Orrin Krebs, Battle Ground Academy
Although the military is something that is tied to immense honor and bravery, I would not want to join the military. I do believe that it is something that is very important, especially to our safety as a country, but I just do not agree with violence on our fellow human beings. Especially in the 21st century, we are very connected around the world, and to me going into combat with other nations is not only devastating, but it is also just an attack on our humanity as a whole.
— Zain Dhatwani, Glenbard West H.S, Glen Ellyn, IL
I believe that serving in the military is prestigious as well as honorable. But such activity can be detrimental and have serious consequences on health, which is the reason I do not consider serving in the military as an optimal option for my future. Accordingly, I respect people who do serve in the military as they choose to live with such fear in their lives.
— Shiv, King of Prussia, PA
I feel like being away from my family and dealing with all of the grief surrounding the fact that I might never see my family again would kill me. Not just that but I do not think I would be able to deal with the thought of brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, passing away in the blink of an eye. Although I have great respect for people in the US armed forces I would just not be fit for the job.
— Valeria, J.R. Masterman
I am not an American and would most likely never consider becoming American, never mind fighting wars for them. To me the youth of the USA seem to be brain washed into thinking that their countries military action is somehow for defense and morally justified. The way they are taught to see fellow citizens who do not support them as traitors is similar to how a fanatical terrorist group deals with thoughts and ideas that challenge their own. The way the US has casually interfered in the internal affairs of other sovereign nations is simply put … tyrannical. Anyone who believes in justice, honor and the preservation of peace and prosperity would not be able to support their expansionist ideals. Don’t be fooled by “benefits” or claims that waging wars on the other side of the planet is somehow a defensive tactic.
— Gregor, South Africa
I have no desire to go fight in meaningless oil wars, risking life and limb to come back with PTSD, with my only contribution being to help a rich man get richer. Don’t get me wrong, I have respect for our troops and our veterans, but I disagree intensely with America’s history of imperialism and see no reason to become a cog in that machine. Frankly, I’m disgusted by the ad campaigns trying to brand the military as a way to get out of college debt. The system put in place by the rich gets young Americans in mountains of debt, then says “oh, well we’ll help you get out of it if you put your life on the line for us.” It makes one wonder if part of the reason elites oppose free college is because that would eliminate one of their recruitment pools. First you put someone in debt, then you make them go fight for oil.
— Finnian L, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NC
For those that have enlisted within our armed forces, I have a great respect for what they are willing to do to preserve our national security. But I myself do not believe I will join the military, although I have considered it. I feel like there are still ways that one can show their patriotism and support for the armed forces without enlisting. I hope to continue to support veterans and active troops in the future, whether that is donating funds or time with them.
— Jack G, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn, Illinois
I don’t think I would consider it because from what I’ve seen, it seems risky, and I don’t see myself enjoying it. There are a lot of things that could happen to me. I could possibly get killed, which is something I don’t want to risk. I know that serving is a sign of patriotism, but I want to be patriotic in a way that doesn’t get me killed.
— Catherine Jonathan, J.R Masterman
_________
After an in-depth investigation of textbooks in “Two States. Eight Textbooks. Two American Stories.,” the education reporter Dana Goldstein highlighted responses from readers about their opinions, observations and beliefs about textbooks.
We asked students to reflect on their experiences with textbooks: Should they be used in schools? Are they effective tools for learning? Do the textbooks in their classrooms show bias? They noted the many ways textbooks have been both useful and harmful to their learning.
Many of my teachers also end up disregarding textbooks entirely and using other sources that can be found easily online and are better to use. However, I have had some textbooks that have helped me tremendously in my classes, especially when I couldn’t understand something that was being taught or needed to study. I think in general I do trust a lot of the things I read in textbooks, but I do try to pay attention to the way things are phrased and described to see if there’s any bias. I think textbooks can be free of bias and opinion if they include all of the facts and provide both sides of an argument, but admittedly it is easy to see why some might struggle to create entire descriptive paragraphs without portraying someone in a good or bad light.
— Nicole Medina, Apopka, Florida
Most of the time I believe what’s written in my textbooks, well because, why shouldn’t I? If I’m being forced to read a textbook on information I know nothing about for a class where I’m required to learn, why would the information be biased or unfactual? I’m not saying textbooks are completely unbiased, because as this article shows, there is bias prevalent. I’m just saying that as a student who wants to learn, for example history, I should be able to trust the sources I’m given at school for accurate, unbiased, and inclusive information.
— Camelia Heins, Fountain Valley High School
I personally have noticed biases in my textbooks in school, living in North Carolina we tend to get more right wing rhetoric put into text books. It’s been the job of my teachers to mention things such as the Wilmington Race Riots, a thing I would have never learned about reading a state history textbook.
This entire concept can’t help but feel dystopian. I’m reminded of a quote from George Orwell, “Those who control the present, control the past and those who control the past control the future.” I’m fearful of how biased education affects the population. At what point can we call this what it is- brainwashing?
— Finnian L, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NC
We feel that publicly funded education is not free from bias and some of this problem stems from the textbooks we use. Because private institutions manufacture and distribute learning materials such as textbooks to public institutions, they tend to have bias. This creates widespread misunderstandings that can be reinforced and instilled in our youth. Currently no educators address the issue of bias in our textbooks and they teach it as fact.
The government needs to create a standardized and sheerly fact based curriculum including governmental produced textbooks to ensure less discrepancies like some private companies have now, in order to solve this issue and save future generations from ignorance. For example the Trail of Tears was taught in school as if the U.S. Government just forced them to walk to a new living area, where in reality there were many other infractions of the Native Americans rights such as property destruction and assault.
— Michele M, Ryan F., Glenbard West HS, Glen Ellyn, IL
As a student in a world where everyone gives their opinions and are influenced by others, I’ve learned to not trust everything I hear/read. History textbooks are where bias is most noticeable to me. My junior year history teacher is one of the first people I’ve met who confirmed that history books are biased and opened my eyes to the fact we truly don’t know what information is being withheld from us or altered to sound better.
For example the Philippine-American war, which occurred in 1899-1902 and many Filipinos died, is not mentioned or is briefly discussed in most American history textbooks. This war is significant and can be more thoroughly explained in Filipino history textbooks, but during the Philippine-American war America looks more like the bad guy so most American authors completely disregard adding this war into the textbook or skim over the details.
— Jess Mills, Glenbard West High School, Glen Ellyn IL
The overall concept of a book with educational criteria and assignments is a great idea, but when it comes students having to carry around large, heavy textbooks for each class, the idea is less appealing. However, in this day and age textbooks can be accessed via the internet, making them perfect for modern learning. I for one don’t have a single physical textbook, but I benefit greatly using online methods. There are some exceptions though, as these seven hundred paged books aren’t updated regularly with new and changing knowledge as the world acquires it. I think students should always have access to them, but learning shouldn’t be solely dependent upon them.
— Julia Grandpre, Sarasota Fl
As a student who frequently uses textbooks, I think that textbooks are a great help and play a huge role in people’s education. With the use of the internet, online textbooks are easily accessible and digital which means there is no need for hard copy textbooks.
However, hard copy textbooks aren’t as engaging and interactive. I also think that hard copy textbooks are outdated and aren’t up to date with the generation we live in. In biology class, my teacher gives me a digital textbook to read from and take notes, which is more helpful and interactive than if I were to use a hard copy textbook. This also helped me better learn the topics in class because digital textbooks can contain pictures or animations that can tell you what is happening to help you better learn.
— Jeff Nguyen, Upper Merion High School
At my school, we do not use hard copy textbooks. If there is ever a textbook need for a class, it is downloaded online. As a student that has dyslexia and has an IEP, I requested and have the right for textbooks, hard copy.
Hardcover textbooks allow students to be more attached to their learning, instead of starting at a screen. The schools say that online books are: lighter, easier to access, and cheaper. Yes, these might be true, but when using online textbooks have to be accessed on a computer or iPad, these divides have distractions built into them. On the other hand textbooks allow you to stay focus and “feel” what you are doing. Textbooks help me get through school, without them school would be nearly impossible. But it seems like every year there are less and less textbooks used in classes.
— Caleb Moorhead, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn Illinois
Personally, I have found that finding and using primary sources of information combined with a textbook is the most engaging form of teaching when it comes to history. I had always been bored by history until one class where we used a lot of our own research and sources other than the textbook, and I came to enjoy it.
— Kathleen Jefferson, Franklin, TN
Physical textbooks are becoming dinosaurs — mostly due to high cost and an effort to be more environmentally friendly. However, I don’t see textbooks (either electronic or paper versions) disappearing completely. Instead, I think teachers are more often adding other resources like videos, articles, primary sources, and hands-on learning to the classroom.
These other resources can help address bias in textbooks or make the subject more relevant. For example, in Civics and Economics, our teacher didn’t just teach about the market economies, she had us research industries in our state by looking at an economic development site run by the state government. We didn’t just learn about gerrymandering. We learned about the dispute about our state’s districts in the Supreme Court by reading the case and briefs to see both sides of the argument.
— William Hudson, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I think that some classes shouldn’t need textbooks because it is easier to learn the subject from experience or actually looking at someone doing something. For example I personally find math easier if I watch someone solve the problem and explain what they are doing. Even in my automotive technology class we read textbooks but, I find it easier to understand when I’m hands on and actually working on a car.
— Artur W., Glenbard West HS Glen Ellen IL
As a public school student, I have used many outdated textbooks. I find that most of them contain biased information that could be perceived as ignorant toward certain groups of people throughout history. For example, in some history textbooks, Christopher Columbus was a hero who “discovered” the Americas and was an ally to the Native Americans. In other cases, the mistreatment of slaves is wildly unexaggerated. Slaves are said to have been “often harmed by their masters.” The brutal violence and sexual abuse that slaves endured is seldom mentioned. The founding fathers are praised, and the fact that they were slave owners seems to be forgotten. All in all, textbooks often deny that the worst parts of history even happened.
— Calliope Beatty, J.R. Masterman
Throughout school, I always loved reading my colorful textbook. Whenever I was bored in class, I would flip through its entertaining pictures and devour the stories of world history. I was astounded by the vast unique cultures and their way of life. I learned everything from nomads and gatherers to the French Revolution and Ming dynasty. The only problem I’ve ever had with it was its heavy weight in my backpack. But now that I’m older, I’ve realized the textbooks I had read as a kid might’ve been censored. If I’m being honest, I’m sort of glad that the actual history of the world wasn’t revealed to me as a kid. I would’ve had a different view of the nation if I’d known about the crimes of raping, lynching, and enslaving my ancestors committed when I was in elementary school. I understand that it might be wrong to tell half truths to the next generation, but, come on, they’re still kids. As humans, we can all agree that the world we live in is corrupt and nowhere near perfect. But should kids know about our imperfection so soon?
— Nakia Spore, Kauai, Hawaii
_________
“Do you ever ponder your place in the cosmos?” we asked students in our Picture Prompt, “Stargazing.” They told us all about the times they’ve looked skyward and wondered about the mysteries of the universe.
But what we loved most? How they used strong imagery and descriptive details to bring us into the moment with them. Read on to see what we mean.
…[W]hen I think about my most memorable time looking up at the night sky, it has to be when I saw a shooting star for the first time. It was the summer between middle and high school and my friend and I went camping in rural Wisconsin. We slept in hammocks, but eventually the mosquitoes were too much to bear so we got out of our hammocks and decided to sleep inside. However, before going inside, we decided to lay out on the dock and look at the stars. It was so clear, every glowing star was visible, and I could hear the water moving beneath me. All of the sudden, there was movement in the sky, a streak of light, a shooting star. This may seem insignificant, it happens all the time. But this was special to me because after that trip, my friend moved far away, and it was hard for me to deal with. Shooting stars will always remind me of that moment.
— Ashlee Waitkus, Glenbard West High School, Glen Ellyn, IL
My experience of looking into the night sky is very odd compared to most other people’s. When mostly everyone else looks up into the cosmos they just see a few glowing dots and maybe a plane or two. It’s easy for them to take in the beauty of our galaxy. But when I look into the sky, I see a dance of the stars. Not metaphorically, but physically. I have a fairly minute case of schizophrenia which makes it so that when I look at the stars, they shoot around and change sizes. This only set in around two years ago and I noticed it when I was on the beach at around 8 p.m.
First, I began to notice the stars moving around rapidly like fruit flies, and then I was met with a hallucination of a very strong scent. At first I was incredibly scared of what was happening and asked my mom if she saw what I was seeing and smelling. Obviously she wasn’t. That only happened a few times that year, but now it happens every time I look up to the night sky. Although my condition can be scary to think about, I like sharing these weird experiences I have.
— Rachel Maston, Hoggard High School - Wilmington, NC
One of my favorite memories involving space was during my trip to Alaska. I’d desperately wanted to see the Northern Lights, but I was there during the summer; I instead got to experience something entirely different: the midnight sun. In the middle of the Talkeetna Mountain range, far from any big cities and light, at the ripe hour of 12:00 am was when the sun would start it’s decent into the horizon. Simultaneously the moon would be present, waiting to hang low in the sky for a few hours before the sun would come right back up at 4:00. This was a daylight pattern I’d never experienced in my life before, I wish I could experience forever. It would never get completely dark, just dusky, and despite this, the stars would shine bright and clear. I spent most of my nights on this trip staring up at the sky and waiting for the watercolor sunset to cast an alpine glow on all of the mountains and let the stars and moon shine.
— Ani, Glenbard West High School
The one special memory I have is when my family and I took a day off to drive to Columbus Ohio to see the full solar eclipse. It was one of the most amazing things I have ever experienced, my dad and I were both crying. Standing in a field with all of the other people that came to see it as the moon blocked the sun, watching everything get dark, felt otherworldly.
— Dave, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn, IL
Whenever I get the chance, I love to stargaze, and I think everyone should do the same. For me, whether it’s simply looking out the window or going out into the yard and just looking up, stargazing offers an amazing viewpoint. Even though I’m just in my backyard, I feel something like a lesser version of the Overview Effect, an experience that astronauts have described as making them view the Earth as a whole rather than divided, brought on by seeing the Earth from above. While I don’t get to experience the full Overview Effect by any stretch of the imagination, by looking up at the stars and the vastness of the universe, I simultaneously feel overwhelmed and at peace with humanity’s place in the universe. I feel a sense of unity with everyone else who is in this same position as me, everyone on our planet.
— Kathleen Jefferson, Franklin, TN
I have always had a soft-spot for space, something about an endless dark ocean of nothing has always had a grasp on my imagination and thoughts. The idea of our deep blue sky turning into the vast and expanding nothingness that is the swaths of space between planets has, to me, been nothing more than the final frontier, the final great ocean to map. I love the idea that earth, and the entire solar system that surrounds it, is simply an atoll in space, a collection of mass and heat encased by an immeasurable expanse.
As I child I would regularly spend my weeks out in the country, and each night I would sit near the empty fields and look up, to the skies above and wish to be among those planets, and stars in space. And even today, I still want to visit the unknown regions of the universe, see new stars, new meteors and entirely new systems.
And I will always have this passion because there will always be stars above to observe, and people like me who will hope beyond hope to leave this world and explore that big dark sea, and the atolls out there in space. Space is the one great unknown that is known, and the last gamble that all people can partake in, no matter their history, the final frontier is asking to be explored by those who dare.
— William L, Glenbard West High School
Looking at the stars has never been something that I’ve made an effort to do, although, there is one special place where stargazing is a normal activity for me. In my family’s farmhouse in France, there is a large window on the roof upstairs. In France during the summer, the sun doesn’t set until around 10pm, so my mother and I stay up extra late just to look out the window. When the sun does go down, the sky is the clearest you’ve ever seen. The pitch black sky lit up by thousands of sparkles captivates you, and leaves you wanting more the next night, and the night after that. This stargazing is special to me because it offers me time to appreciate nature while spending quality time with my mom. It may not be something big, but the nights I spend stargazing with my mom are some of the most special.
— Uma Volety, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
One of the most memorable moments was when we went snow tubing on this big hill. We grabbed our tubes from the bottom and dragged it all the way up to the top. Sliding down was so much fun but it was too short of a ride, considering how steep the hill was. When I got to the bottom, I left the tube and started to walk up the hill. At one point, I just decided to lay in the snow. It was one of the best decisions in my life.
I have never felt that kind of peace, happiness, joy, and gratitude in my life. The snow was about 1 foot deep so when I landed, it felt like a soft pillow, blocking any other noise from reaching my bliss. All I could hear was my thoughts and all I could see was the distant mountains and the gorgeous sky above me. Never have I been so appreciative of the sky. Even though it wasn’t extremely dark, I could still see the beautiful stars sparkling in the distance. That is how I picture heaven to look like.
Anytime I'm stressed or I think of where I would rather be than in school, It is always at that mountain, in that moment, saying thank you to the sky.
— Tiffanie P, Providence RI