Taron Egerton Tries to Keep ‘Rocketman’ Performance in Orbit
LOS ANGELES — No one delivered a gutsier film performance in 2019 than Taron Egerton.
Cast against type as Elton John in “Rocketman,” Egerton had to channel a pop god while also making the role his own: too unfamiliar and fans would revolt, too much of an impersonation and critics would retreat.
Egerton, 30, did all of his own singing, reinterpreting classics like “The Bitch Is Back” and “I’m Still Standing.” There was intricate choreography that Egerton sometimes had to perform in platform boots and towering feathered headdresses. Egerton, who is heterosexual, also filmed gay sex scenes, a first for a major studio film; one found him grinding in an orgy to “Bennie and the Jets.” He did many of his own stunts (tumbling drunkenly down a staircase) and shaved the front half of his head to get John’s receding hairline just right.
John was ecstatic, and critics were gobsmacked. This showstopping performance came out of Taron Egerton, the easily discounted guy from the “Kingsman” action movies? The inevitable awards chatter began. “An Oscar caliber performance,” Peter Travers wrote in Rolling Stone when “Rocketman” arrived in theaters in May.
Hollywood is now in the throes of deciding which performances to honor with Oscar nominations. Voting for the 92nd Academy Awards started on Thursday; nominations will be announced on Jan. 13. And Egerton is trying to become an exception to one of the Oscar race’s most stubborn rules of thumb — that voters don’t reward performances from the first half of the year: out of sight, out of mind.
Oscar statuettes are supposed to honor the best performances of the year — the whole year — but most of the nominees are pulled from films that arrive in a three-month stretch between October and December. Voters also tend to favor established stars, in part because those performers have the most sway with studios, which spend millions of dollars (sometimes tens of millions) on ads, tastemaker parties and other for-your-consideration efforts. Big stars also dominate the red-carpet media coverage of precursor awards galas like the Golden Globes, which take place on Sunday.
The academy has 50 best-actor nominee slots per decade. Since 2009, 47 have been given to people in films released in the second half of the year. The exceptions are Daniel Kaluuya, nominated for “Get Out,” which was released in February 2017; Demián Bichir, honored for the immigrant drama “A Better Life,” released in June 2011; and Jeremy Renner, who scored a nod for “The Hurt Locker,” released in June 2009.
Paramount released “Rocketman” in late May in part because its cupboards were bare. The studio, under new management and working to rebuild itself, was short on big-budget franchise films but did have a relatively inexpensive ($41 million) musical fantasia about Elton John’s hedonistic breakthrough years. So Paramount rolled the dice and positioned “Rocketman” as a summer event movie.
It worked. The film took in nearly $200 million worldwide.
“One person told me they had seen it 23 times — it meant that much to them,” Egerton said by phone last week from Wales, where he was visiting his parents for Christmas. (He insisted he did not mind interrupting pie-baking to chat about “Rocketman” and the awards race. Now that is devotion.)
Egerton’s performance does not look any less dazzling from a distance. It was enough to garner him a nomination for best actor in a comedy or musical at the Globes. In a surprise, Egerton was also nominated for the top male acting prize at the Screen Actors Guild Awards, which will be handed out on Jan. 19. “It’s enormously validating to be recognized by your acting peers,” he said, adding that two of his “idols,” Tom Hanks and Joaquin Phoenix, sent him out-of-the-blue praise via email when “Rocketman” came out.
But most awards prognosticators predict that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences will overlook Egerton. In an unusually bountiful year for men, handicappers at Gold Derby, an entertainment honors site, see best actor Oscar nominations going to Adam Driver (“Marriage Story,” released in theaters on Nov. 6), Phoenix (“Joker,” Oct. 4), Leonardo DiCaprio (“Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood,” July 26) and Antonio Banderas (“Pain and Glory,” Oct. 4).
That leaves stars like Eddie Murphy (“Dolomite Is My Name,” Oct. 4), Adam Sandler (“Uncut Gems,” Dec. 13), Robert De Niro (“The Irishman,” Nov. 1) and Christian Bale (“Ford v Ferrari,” Nov. 15) vying for the fifth slot alongside the critically respected but lesser-known Jonathan Pryce (“The Two Popes,” Nov. 27).
And, of course, Egerton — for what is now the most distant performance of the batch. The Oscars will be held on Feb. 9.
Egerton is also up against one of the most aggravating aspects of the Oscar-nominating system. Warped narratives form around candidates, often courtesy of whispering competitors, that have nothing to do with the quality of the work. The narrative that has trailed Egerton involves the superficial similarity of his performance with that of the reigning Oscar winner for best actor, Rami Malek, honored for his portrayal of another gay British rocker, Freddie Mercury, in the biopic “Bohemian Rhapsody.”
“There is a groupthink that often occurs that undercuts the legitimacy of the Oscars,” said Sue Fleishman, the head of September Media, a corporate communications consultancy, and the former communications chief at Warner Bros. and Amblin Partners. “It stops being about what’s deserving and starts to be more about politics.”
Paramount has supported Egerton with an awards campaign that has included for-your-consideration billboards along Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles and the Long Island Expressway in New York. An event in October, “Rocketman: Live in Concert,” found Egerton and John performing duets at the Greek Theater in L.A. One of the songs was “Don’t Let the Sun Go Down on Me.”
As the “Rocketman” team works to put forward its own narrative — think the little engine that could — another event is planned for Saturday on the Paramount lot. John and his songwriting partner, Bernie Taupin, will appear at a special screening and question- and-answer session alongside Egerton and the film’s director, Dexter Fletcher.
“Obviously I’ve made some effort with Paramount to maintain some visibility,” Egerton said. “It’s not an imposition at all. I feel lucky. And there are so many deserving people who worked on the movie.” Paramount is also hoping that Oscar voters will nominate “Rocketman” for sound design, sound mixing, costume design and original song.
Egerton hit all the right campaign notes while on the phone, making sure, for instance, to connect “Rocketman” to a greater theme. “Particularly for gay people, it felt like a movie — from what they have told me — that celebrated their identity in a real way,” he said. “That feels like the greatest accomplishment.”
He was also humble, saying that he was excited to be attending the Globes as a nominee but that he was even more thrilled to be bringing along his parents and sisters from Britain.
“I know this may never happen again,” he said. “I want to share it with the people I love.”
He was quiet for a minute. “I’m honored to be included in the awards conversation,” he said. “But when that stuff is primary and not secondary, you are possibly on the wrong path.”