Review: A Transgender Choreographer Takes on Machismo
Is the choreographer Sean Dorsey really the first established openly transgender artist in the dance world? Mr. Dorsey is an important figure in the field, but by no means the only one; in terms of grants and awards, his San Francisco company, now in its 15th season, has made strides. And in November, he celebrated an unequivocal first: Wearing a T-shirt that read “I [heart] Being Trans,” he became the first openly transgender artist to land on the cover of Dance Magazine.
As always, the work matters, and the two-act piece, “Boys in Trouble” that his company, Sean Dorsey Dance, brought to New York Live Arts on Sunday as part of its Live Artery series, was unremarkable and unsophisticated. (It continues through Tuesday.) A highly emotional rumination about the toxic side of contemporary masculinity, “Boys in Trouble” looks at the struggle to fight, adhere to and ultimately rebrand what it means to be masculine.
At his best, Mr. Dorsey, who also performs, maintains a kind of goofy demeanor; he leans heavily toward humor in attempts to break down stereotypes about gender, race and, of course, the art of machismo. “My arms grow the wrong kind of feathers for flight,” he says in the opening voice-over while stretching and undulating them under a spotlight. “At least that’s what they told me all my life. You won’t fit, you won’t fly, you won’t find your pack.”
But as “Boys in Trouble” attests, he did. Joined by four dancers who stand in their own spotlights in a pyramid formation, Mr. Dorsey leads the cast in unison steps: turns with head circles and spiraling arms that scoop through the air alongside the audible (and tedious) sound of their breath.
As it continues, the flow of Mr. Dorsey’s choreography — aerobic, athletic and on a loop — doesn’t disguise its colorlessness. With its vignette-heavy approach and swooping, full-bodied movement, “Boys in Trouble” feels reminiscent of socially-minded dance-theater works of the  1990s as it veers between dancing passages (often accompanied by voice-overs) and rambling sections dense with live dialogue. Mr. Dorsey’s drawn-out delivery, with its melodramatic pauses, undercuts the weight of what he has to say.
Editing could tighten this show, which felt long at nearly two hours (including an intermission), and perhaps make its message more succinct. But it’s unlikely that it could be saved: At times, “Boys in Trouble” had aspects in common with a sexual-harassment video instructing employees on how not to behave in the workplace. In one scene, the dancers froze in seemingly macho positions — crouching, splaying their legs, looking tough — until they broke free and dissolved into laughter. Afterward, they sniffed at the air suspiciously until they surrounded Mr. Dorsey. “Difference,” he proclaimed with authority. “Boys sniff it out in a second.”
As Mr. Dorsey discussed his upbringing — he loved Barbies and his heroes were Carol Burnett and Michael Jackson — he sang-spoke a line that carried weight: “Who was the only guy in his graduating class buying maxi-pads?” Later, he added, “I emerged as a fully-formed adult male in my 20s without ever having gone through a boyhood.”
“Boys in Trouble,” which explores things like white privilege, body-shaming and race, is sharpest when Mr. Dorsey and his dancers get personal. One of the more affecting moments is a duet between ArVejon Jones and Will Woodward that explores the pleasure of two black men loving each other. They have a theatrical ease that is missing from other sections.
Mr. Dorsey’s monologues have the tendency to say the same thing twice, but he has important points to make. “Why is it that we demand that our culture complicate masculinity, but we ask trans people to simplify?” he says. “I’m different. I love being different. Let me love being different. I have paid my maxi-pad dues, O.K.? With wings.”
That wasn’t the actual ending, but it could have been. With its constant starts and stops, “Boys in Trouble” was more self-indulgent than transformative. In its real conclusion, the dancers moved in sculptural poses to brooding string music. These boys were no longer in trouble, at least for now. Naturally Mr. Dorsey, through a voice-over, had the final say: “I found my pack.”