Probing the Murder of a Pakistani Internet Sensation
A WOMAN LIKE HER
The Story Behind the Honor Killing of a Social Media Star
By Sanam Maher
In the early days of internet access, a young woman sits at a family computer, thrilling to its crackle and whine. It’s connection she’s after, a world where it seems possible to chat with anyone, anywhere, or to be anyone, name and ASL — age, sex, location — all negotiable. But this moment of excitement, of enchantment, is over almost as soon as it’s begun.
Her brother, self-appointed guardian of his sister’s honor, spies from behind. Enraged by her digital effrontery, he screams, then slaps her. By morning, the computer is gone, her access to university only narrowly preserved. This is Pakistan in the early aughts, where expectations for and control over female modesty and behavior extend to the new frontier of the internet.
That young woman is not the main focus of Sanam Maher’s compelling and disturbing new book, “A Woman Like Her.” But as with so many stories in this intricately wrought work of reportage, this one casts light, and shade, on that of Maher’s central subject, Pakistan’s “first social media celebrity,” Qandeel Baloch. Baloch’s story, in Maher’s hands, also begins with a brother watching. She is 8 or 9, mimicking a suggestive dance she has seen on TV. She too is hit by her brother. And 17 or so years later, another brother, seeking to defend the family honor against her online antics, will spike her milk with a sedative and strangle her.
[ Read an excerpt from “A Woman Like Her.” ]
Baloch’s murder in 2016 at the age of 26 was a sensation widely covered both in Pakistan and abroad, just as her life had been. She was famous, or infamous, for posting provocative videos — such as one in which, wearing a bikini, she promised to strip if Pakistan’s cricket team beat India’s (it didn’t) — that so defied acceptable behavior for a Pakistani woman that she became a category of one. Unable to excel as a singer, actress or model, she adroitly identified social media as offering a cheaper, and so more easily accessible, kind of fame. Determined to hold attention whatever it took, willing to accept, if not relish, any insult except indifference, she was as savvy as she was cartoonish. But hers was a volatile kind of notoriety, one that required ever greater risks to maintain, even as it left her isolated and vulnerable.
With such a public subject, what could there be left to tell? Maher, a journalist based in Karachi, answers that question handily, and originally. “A Woman Like Her” is a model of how to report on celebrity: by focusing on the seedy characters who feed and exploit it, and by harvesting the details, especially at the seam between public and private, that more conventional journalists leave behind. Maher has an often thrillingly slant gaze, an eye alert to the absurdities, ironies and small tragedies at play in the manufacture of images and personas. Her book is full of unforgettable scenes and vignettes — Baloch, pretending to be a clueless urbanite, her stilettos sinking into the mud on a reality show set in a village like the one where she was raised; a television talk show blurring her cleavage-spot to capitalize on her risqué image, even though she is wearing nothing revealing. This tension over who is in control of Baloch’s life drives the book.
Among Maher’s wise choices is to accept that the very publicness of Baloch’s life makes her, on some level, unknowable. She was a construction, down to her name, which was invented. (Indeed the disclosure of her real name by local media may have played a role in her death, by exposing her family to local ridicule and judgment.) Maher sprinkles the book with Baloch’s own words, spoken and written, but she doesn’t try to resolve their contradictions. Baloch was brave and foolish, phenomenally independent and pathetically needy, protective of her virtue and, as was her right, also willing to trade on it. She was a type (see: a Kardashian, to whom she was sometimes compared) but also only herself. She was proof, if we needed it, that a life can be lived simultaneously on the rise and on the run.
Maher diligently traces Baloch’s steps from her family home to an abusive marriage to the women’s shelter where she resolves to leave her husband but also, permanently, her son, behind. From there Baloch moved through a series of disillusioning way stations, the limited menu for a woman on the make: bus hostess, model. Everywhere in these subcultures Maher finds women confined and commodified, desperately trying, and rarely succeeding, to govern their own lives. No wonder the internet seemed to offer Baloch a new kind of freedom, one worth the price of the abuse she received. Social media is “not someone’s father’s property,” she tells her critics. “Everyone has the right to express their opinion on it.” And yet this is a dark book, in which loyalty and kindness are outdone by exploitation and cruelty. Maher, for example, finds the young reporter who breathlessly raced to Baloch’s family home after receiving a police tip about her murder. Dissatisfied with his scoop, he arranged to have the sheet covering her corpse removed so that he could photograph it, so he could see for himself. This is amorality without a floor.
Maher excels at finding the bit players who often seem to have more power than the main cast. There is, for example, the illiterate chaiwalah, or “tea boy,” who, photographed at work, becomes an overnight internet sensation thanks to his striking blue eyes. Maher finds his manager and social media adviser coaching him on everything from elocution to how to behave like a star so that he can remain one.
That story proves that it’s not only women who must navigate the new mores of social media. But ultimately this is a book about what it means to be a woman in Pakistan and also online. The sickening insults and death threats Baloch endured aren’t confined to any one country; when it comes to misogyny, the internet has proved a demonically equalizing force. And Maher astutely probes how laws meant to protect women from harassment can also be used to control and punish blasphemers, minorities and critics of the military government.
I wish she had done more to examine Facebook’s power in Pakistan, which she alludes to but never fully explicates. After Baloch’s promise to strip, an online campaign is launched against her and Facebook cuts her ties to her 400,000 followers. Maher doesn’t provide any explanation from the company for this, nor for the subsequent restoration of Baloch’s account. Still, it’s a reminder of the capricious and secretive government to which Facebook users have pledged allegiance.
There are other omissions: More Pakistani history might have been helpful for readers unfamiliar with how the country’s enmity with India, its Islamist parties and its military elite have shaped its mores and culture. At the same time, the profusion of details can become too much, the chronology of where we are in Baloch’s life difficult to sort out. But these are small quibbles. “A Woman Like Her” is the story of a woman who was a survivor, until she wasn’t. It’s also a map of the savage underworld we’ve made.