Why America’s Political Divisions Will Only Get Worse
WHY WE’RE POLARIZED
By Ezra Klein
My first reaction to any book about our polarization is “Oh, no, not another one.” We have a ton of books and many more articles and op-eds about the polarized state of our politics, our elections and our country. So the question about “Why We’re Polarized” was whether its author had anything meaningful to add.
Ezra Klein describes himself in his new book the following way: “I’ve been a political journalist for more than 15 years. In that time, I’ve been a blogger, a newspaper reporter, a magazine writer, a long-form editor, an opinion columnist, a cable news host, a social media personality, a viral video star, a podcaster and a media entrepreneur.” That would be quite a career — but Klein is only 35 years old!
He burst onto the national opinion stage in 2007, at the age of 23, with a blog at The American Prospect. A year and a half later, he moved to The Washington Post to create what became known as Wonkblog, an extraordinarily powerful and compelling example of what we now call explanatory journalism — less opinion (not no opinion) and more in-depth exploration of ideas and policy proposals. Wonkblog became particularly important as it delved into health policy at just the time that the debate heated up over what became the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. Klein also became an opinion columnist for Bloomberg and a frequent host on prime time shows at MSNBC. Five years later, he launched Vox, an explanatory news organization that he says now reaches more than 50 million people each month.
What made Klein so prominent was his ability to absorb vast amounts of data and complex studies and provide a framework for understanding them in a clear-cut, readable fashion, accessible both to experts and to lay people. He makes clear that he is firmly on the progressive side of politics and policy, but does not tilt his analysis to fit his predispositions. And indeed, “Why We’re Polarized” delivers.
[ Read an excerpt from “Why We’re Polarized.” ]
Klein describes neatly and concisely what has changed in our electoral politics, using political science research from scholars like Alan Abramowitz and Steven Webster of Emory. In the 1970s, voters tended to split tickets between, say, congressional and presidential races; in that decade the correlation of the two votes was 0.54. In the 1980s it rose to 0.65. Now it is 0.97! Just as stunning, another researcher, the political scientist Corwin Smidt, found that today’s self-proclaimed independents “vote more predictably for one party over another than yesteryear’s partisans.” The key here, however, is what Abramowitz and Webster call “negative partisanship” — that people are now more motivated by their antipathy for the other party than by affinity for their own. The willingness of ardent Trump supporters to stick with him through scandal, outrage and actions that may damage their own economic standing becomes more understandable — criticizing him or seeing him suffer a defeat means that the evil enemy has gained a victory.
What Klein adds especially to our understanding of how we got here — why Trump is more a vessel for our division than the cause, and why his departure will not provide any magical cure — is represented in his overall thesis: There is a logic to our polarization. It has become a kind of loop. As the public has polarized, in part because of the behavior of political actors and institutions (including media), the actors and institutions respond by behaving in more polarized ways — which further polarizes the public, and so on and so on. Klein focuses on political identity, noting that the phrase “identity politics” has become a weapon used by one group to diminish the legitimacy of others, but that there is a better way to use the term: not as a blade, he says, but as a lens.
Of course, we all have many identities. We have family ones, community ones, ethnic and racial ones, religious ones, hobby-related ones and so many more. In October, one of my core identities was as a fan of the Washington Nationals — and to see the exultation of more than 40,000 fans at Nationals Park when they won the National League pennant, morphing into ecstasy for hundreds of thousands when they won the World Series, underscored how an identity that should not be core can animate people.
But sport fandom aside, America has gone from people having overlapping and intersecting identities to where there is now a set of political mega-identities. Klein writes that these identities are now stacked on top of one another so that challenging one of them challenges all of them. “The merging of the identities means when you activate one you often activate all, and each time they’re activated, they strengthen.” He quotes the scholar Lilliana Mason: “The crisis emerges when partisan identities fall into alignment with other social identities, stoking our intolerance of each other to levels that are unsupported by our degrees of political disagreement.”
As Klein digs more deeply into this, the results become unrelentingly depressing. He draws on a slew of studies to show that when we are presented with evidence contradicting our beliefs, the strong reaction is to discount it and look for evidence that confirms our beliefs. Persuasive studies show that if you take people who are deeply into their political identities and make them watch, listen to and read those who have opposite views, it causes them to dig even more deeply into their core identities, not alter them or soften their views of the enemy. And the impact of all this is greater on those who pay the most attention to issues and politics than it is on the more disengaged!
Even more depressing is what happens when you explore the identity division through the lens of demography. That means especially confronting race, and looking at what happens to identity as society’s racial composition changes. One research project asked white college students about race, and then primed them to think about white privilege. That led them to express more racial resentment, not less. Klein adds: “The simplest way to activate someone’s identity is to threaten it, to tell them they don’t deserve what they have, to make them consider that it might be taken away. The experience of losing status — and being told your loss of status is part of society’s march to justice — is itself radicalizing.”
The political scientists John Sides, Michael Tesler and Lynn Vavreck demonstrated that in the 2016 campaign, racial resentment activated economic anxiety, not the other way around, and that the relationship between the two can be surprising. When Barack Obama was president, as the economy picked up steam, Democrats grew more optimistic and Republicans more pessimistic, but as soon as Trump won, the numbers flipped, despite the fact that economic indicators did not. And Tesler has shown that now the most racially resentful whites are the most optimistic about the economy.
The reinforcement of identities means that white liberal Democrats are “less likely than African-Americans to say that black people should be able to get ahead without any special help.” As the journalist Matthew Yglesias notes, “Democrats themselves have moved the goal posts in terms of what kind of racial views one is expected to affirm as a good liberal.” And as Democrats have moved left on race, Republicans have veered sharply right. Looking ahead, to win elections, Democrats will need their diverse coalition, meaning they will have to be even more explicit about racial and gender justice and equality, but Republicans will need to be even more responsive to a largely white coalition.
Klein makes clear, drawing in part on my work with Thomas E.  Mann (which, in full disclosure, he praises), that the parties have reacted to, and weathered, the drive toward polarization in different ways. By doubling and tripling down on a more homogeneous group, Republicans have become more cultlike and resistant to compromise or moderation; Democrats, in contrast, have “an immune system of diversity and democracy.” Klein says that “if polarization has given the Democratic Party the flu, the Republican Party has caught pneumonia.”
Justin Amash, the libertarian House member, told Vox before he left the Republican Party to become an independent, “I get a lot of reactions now from Trump supporters saying, ‘Who cares how big the government is,’ or ‘Who cares how much we’re spending as long as we’re fighting against illegal immigration and pushing back against the left.’”
For those who think demography is destiny, Klein has an answer, and it is an unsettling one. Baked into the political system devised by our framers is an increasing bias toward geography and away from people. As the country grows more diverse, the representation and power in our politics will grow even less reflective of that dynamism. By 2040, 70 percent of Americans will live in 15 of our 50 states, and 50 percent will live in just 8 states. The Electoral College will be less responsive to the popular vote, and we will likely have more elections where the winner of the popular vote loses the presidency — and it could be by five million or six million or seven million votes, not the 500,000 margin for Al Gore in 2000 or the three-million margin for Hillary Clinton against Trump.
Thirty percent of Americans will elect 70 of the 100 senators. At some point, the fundamental legitimacy of the system will be challenged. And all of this is without considering the thumb on the scales provided by a Supreme Court that has turned a blind eye to racial discrimination, voter suppression and outrageous partisan gerrymandering.
What to do? Here Klein has few answers. He rightly says that our problems are more cultural than structural, but our hopes rest on some structural reforms to redress some of the imbalance. He calls for eliminating the Electoral College, eliminating the Senate filibuster, allowing Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia to become states and taking steps to make the House of Representatives more reflective of the country. Of course, even these measures, commendable though they may be, are a very heavy lift.
In the end, he offers simply the hope that as Americans become more aware of the cancer of our current identity politics, they will make efforts to reduce their own involvement. I hope he is right. I fear that, notwithstanding his thoughtful, clear and persuasive analysis, we have a long and torturous path ahead.