Golden Globes 2020: Where to Stream the Winners
Of all the films that competed for best drama at the Golden Globes, four are currently streaming. But the odd one out also happened to be the surprise winner, Sam Mendes’s World War I thriller “1917,” which is only just beginning its theatrical run. And while prominent Netflix nominees like “The Irishman,” “The Two Popes” and “Dolemite is My Name” got blanked, most of the other winners on the film side are either on Netflix or available on other streaming services now, with Bong Joon Ho’s foreign-language champ “Parasite” coming next week.
On the television side, the awards were spread out across cable networks and subscription services, with HBO having a particularly good night with “Succession” and “Chernobyl” winning multiple prizes, including best drama and best limited series or TV movie, and Phoebe Waller-Bridge picking up best comedy and actress in a comedy for her Amazon series “Fleabag.” Though a couple of shows are exclusive to one provider, most can be picked up from a variety of different services.
Here’s a guide to the major-category winners that are currently a click away, along with excerpts from their New York Times reviews.
Won for: Best picture, musical or comedy; best screenplay; best supporting actor
“[Quentin] Tarantino is still practicing a cinema of saturation, demanding the audience’s total attention and bombarding us with allusions, visual jokes, flights of profane eloquence, daubs of throwaway beauty and gobs of premeditated gore. And yet ‘Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood,’ whose title evokes bedtime stories as well as a pair of Sergio Leone masterpieces, is Tarantino’s most relaxed movie by far, both because of its ambling, shaggy-dog structure and the easygoing rhythm of its scenes.” (Read the full Times review by A.O. Scott.)
Where to watch: Rent it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actor, drama; best score
“An empty, foggy exercise in second-hand style and second-rate philosophizing. Besotted with the notion of its own audacity — as if willful unpleasantness were a form of artistic courage — the film turns out to be afraid of its own shadow, or at least of the faintest shadow of any actual relevance.” (Read the full Times review by A.O. Scott.)
Where to watch: Buy it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actress, drama
“Mostly, ‘Judy’ offers the familiar spectacle of one star playing another. [Renée] Zellweger’s performance is credible, with agitated flutters and filigreed touches, though it leans hard on Judy’s tremulous fragility, as if she were a panicked hummingbird. The take is also cautious, too comfortable; it never makes you flinch or look away.” (Read the full Times review by Manohla Dargis.)
Where to watch: Rent it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actress, musical or comedy
“The film, which announces itself as ‘based on an actual lie,’ has a loose, anecdotal structure and a tone that balances candor and tact. Much of the charm and power of this story — about events leading up to a wedding that’s also a fake funeral of sorts — come from the palpable sense that it genuinely happened to someone.” (Read the full Times review by A.O. Scott.)
Where to watch: Rent it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actor, musical or comedy; best original song
“The point of ‘Rocketman’ isn’t self-aggrandizement. It’s fan service of an especially and characteristically generous kind. It’s certain that Elton John has nothing left to prove, but it’s also possible that he’s underappreciated. He has been part of the pop-music mainstream for so long — more than 50 years! — that the scope of his genius and the scale of his accomplishments risk being taken for granted.” (Read the full Times review by A.O. Scott.)
Where to watch: Rent it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best animated film
“The setup is satisfactory. The payoff is somewhat less so, especially once the film begins dealing in platitudes about friendship and the action moves to the Himalayas. The icy land of lost yetis proves, visually, a lot less exciting than the more intricately art-directed details of human civilization.” (Read the full Times review by Ben Kenigsberg.)
Where to watch: Stream it on Hulu. Rent it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best supporting actress
“It’s funny and sad, sometimes within a single scene, and it weaves a plot out of the messy collapse of a shared reality, trying to make music out of disharmony. The melody is full of heartbreak, loss and regret, but the song is too beautiful to be entirely melancholy.” (Read the full Times review by A.O. Scott.)
Where to watch: Stream it on Netflix.
Won for: Best foreign-language film
“Bong has some ideas in “Parasite,” but the movie’s greatness isn’t a matter of his apparent ethics or ethos — he’s on the side of decency — but of how he delivers truths, often perversely and without an iota of self-serving cant. (He likes to get under your skin, not wag his finger.)” (Read the full Times review by Manohla Dargis.)
Where to watch: Coming to iTunes, Amazon, Vudu and Google Play on Jan. 14.
Won for: Best musical or comedy; best actress, musical or comedy
“It helps, no doubt, that [Phoebe] Waller-Bridge writes her own dialogue. She’s like a composer whose pieces are best written for her own instrument; she knows just the spaces to add a riff or shoot a disarming, conspiratorial glance. But she can also play plangent solos, and the first season — as Fleabag realized she couldn’t laugh or fornicate her bad memories away — built to an ending of catharsis.” (Read the full Times review by James Poniewozik.)
Where to watch: Stream it on Amazon.
Won for: Best drama; best actor, drama
“The problem with ‘Succession’ is that the drama, while proficiently made and well acted, doesn’t have enough of a charge. The stakes don’t feel high enough, partly because the strong element of satire leaves us with the nagging feeling that everyone involved (except Brian Cox’s Logan) is a lightweight or an idiot.” (Read the full Times review by Mike Hale.)
Where to watch: Stream it on HBO. Buy it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best limited series or TV movie; best actor, limited series or TV movie
“‘Chernobyl’ takes what you could call a Soviet approach to telling the tale. This is incongruous, since one of the messages of the program is that Soviet approaches don’t work. But there it is: the imposition of a simple narrative on history, the twisting of events to create one-dimensional heroes and villains, the broad-brush symbolism.” (Read the full Times review by Mike Hale.)
Where to watch: Stream it on HBO. Rent it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actress, drama
“‘The Crown’ — the scintillating Netflix drama, improving with age — is not at all shy about putting on a show, doling out all the pageantry and suds necessary. Season 3 delivers 10 entertaining episodes of personal history that are equal parts political, poignant and juicy.” (Read the full Times review by James Poniewozik.)
Where to watch: Stream on Netflix.
Won for: Best actor, musical or comedy
“‘Ramy’ is an effective rebuttal to stereotyping for the same reason that it’s simply good TV: It’s a complex, funny series about messy and specifically drawn people. Its characters are not, to use the cliché, ‘just like us,’ because this is a show that realizes no one is just like anyone else. They are distinctly themselves, and they’re worth getting to know better.” (Read the full Times review by James Poniewozik.)
Where to watch: Stream it on Hulu. Buy it on Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actress, limited series or TV movie
‘The fifth episode is a glimpse of what ‘Fosse/Verdon’ might have been, if it were less attached to its showbiz-downfall template. This series tap-dances as fast as it can, often stunningly. But look past its sleek moves and what you’re mostly left with, in a #MeToo era, is another #HimAgain? story.’ (Read the full Times review by James Poniewozik.)
Where to watch: Stream it on Hulu. Buy it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.
Won for: Best actor, limited series or TV movie
Based on Gabriel Sherman’s book about Roger Ailes, the bellicose founder and leader of Fox News, this Showtime limited series covers a different year every episode, touching on many of the consequential — and always controversial — events in its history. Russell Crowe is all scowls and jowls as Ailes, whose instincts for a niche-driven cable news empire were as keen as his behavior behind the scenes was tempestuous and predatory. (Read the Times feature on show by Austin Considine.)
Where to watch: Stream it on Showtime. Buy it on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu, Google Play and YouTube.