Rosie Perez, at Weinstein Trial, Backs Up Rape Allegation
One night, at the end of 1993, Rosie Perez called her old friend, Annabella Sciorra, looking to go out and have some fun. Ms. Sciorra, a fellow Brooklyn actress, answered the phone in a strange whisper. Ms. Perez asked her what was wrong.
“She said, ‘I think I was raped,’” Ms. Perez testified on Friday at Harvey Weinstein’s trial. Ms. Perez asked the inevitable question: “Do you know who did it?”
At the time, Ms. Sciorra could not, or would not, name her attacker. Instead, she broke into tears and said, “I can’t, I can’t, I can’t,” and she hung up the phone, Ms. Perez said.
But in another call a few months later, Ms. Perez added, Ms. Sciorra finally identified the man she claimed had assaulted her: It was Mr. Weinstein.
“She swore me never to tell anybody,” Ms. Perez said. “I told her to go to the police, and she said: ‘I can’t. He will destroy me. He will destroy my career.’”
Ms. Perez appeared in court on Friday as a prosecution witness, called to the stand at the trial, in Manhattan, to bolster Ms. Sciorra’s own testimony that Mr. Weinstein assaulted her.
On Thursday, a tearful Ms. Sciorra, known for her work in “The Sopranos,” told the jury that Mr. Weinstein pushed his way into her Gramercy Park apartment and raped her after giving her a ride home from a dinner party.
Mr. Weinstein’s trial is widely seen as a watershed moment for the #MeToo movement and has delved into complicated issues of consent and power dynamics in professional situations. Ms. Perez’s account touched upon another common theme of sexual assaults: how women often delay reporting attacks and live with them in silence.
On cross-examination, Damon Cheronis, one of Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers, cut straight to that point. Under his questioning, Ms. Perez acknowledged that, even though one of her best friends had just said she was raped, they did not speak for a couple of days.
“I tried to — she didn’t want to talk about it,” Ms. Perez told the jury. “She was still very upset.”
As months went by, Ms. Perez said, Ms. Sciorra would mention the alleged assault at times, but did not want to share details.
“It was very, very traumatic for her,” Ms. Perez said, “and it was traumatic for me.”
Then in 1994, when Ms. Sciorra was in London filming “The Innocent Sleep,” the two friends spoke by phone. Ms. Sciorra told Ms. Perez that Mr. Weinstein was “harassing her” — he had banged on the door of her hotel room — and that she was “scared he was going to get her again,” Ms. Perez said.
It was during that call, Ms. Perez told the jury, that she “put two and two together” and guessed it was Mr. Weinstein who Ms. Sciorra said had attacked her months earlier. “She started screaming,” Ms. Perez said. “And I tried to calm her down.”
Six women are expected to testify against Mr. Weinstein at the trial. He is accused of five felony counts, including rape and predatory sexual assault, and could be sentenced to life in prison if convicted of the last charge.
His lawyers argue that the women who have accused him had sex with him willingly to advance their careers. Prosecutors claim he lured his accusers to meetings with promises of work, and then physically overpowered them.
The accusations against the producer came to a head in October 2017, when revelations about his alleged serial abuses were published in The New York Times and The New Yorker. More than 90 women have since come forward to accuse Mr. Weinstein of sexual misconduct.
As allegations about his mistreatment of women began to grow and circulate, the producer became increasingly concerned about “the nature of articles” that were set to be published about him, said Sam Anson, a private investigator who testified on Friday before Ms. Perez took the stand.
Two months before the articles in The Times and The New Yorker appeared, Mr. Anson said that he received an email from Mr. Weinstein asking him to investigate a list of “red flags,” people who Mr. Weinstein thought were speaking about him to the media. Among the targets was Ms. Sciorra.
“He was concerned that people on the list might be providing information to journalists,” Mr. Anson said, adding that Mr. Weinstein was also worried “that articles were being written about him that discussed his sexual life in a negative way.”
Mr. Anson never undertook an investigation.
Mr. Weinstein was once a Hollywood giant, a feared executive who reshaped the independent movie industry with Oscar winners like “Shakespeare in Love” and “Pulp Fiction,” and who was a big donor to former President Bill Clinton and other Democrats.
The indictment charges Mr. Weinstein with sexually assaulting two women: Mimi Haleyi, who was a production assistant on his show “Project Runway,” and a hairstylist and aspiring actress from Washington State, whom The Times is not naming because she is an alleged rape victim.
Mr. Weinstein is accused of forcing oral sex on Ms. Haleyi in his TriBeCa apartment in 2006 and raping the aspiring actress at a Doubletree Hotel in Midtown Manhattan in 2013.
Ms. Sciorra was called by prosecutors to bolster the charge of predatory sexual assault. The five-year time limit for filing a separate rape charge in the attack she described has long passed.
Justice James A. Burke is permitting three other women to testify about their allegations that Mr. Weinstein attacked them, even though he is not charged with crimes in those cases.
Prosecutors hope to use their testimony to establish that Mr. Weinstein has a longstanding pattern of preying on women. A similar trial tactic helped lead to a conviction of Bill Cosby on a sexual assault charge in Pennsylvania.
Earlier on Friday, Dr. Barbara Ziv, a forensic psychiatrist who provided expert testimony in Mr. Cosby’s second trial, explained to jurors in the Weinstein case why a woman might remain in contact with her attacker after an assault.
During opening statements, a defense lawyer told the jury that Ms. Haleyi and the aspiring actress from Washington State had stayed in touch with Mr. Weinstein for years after the alleged assaults. They have pointed to friendly emails the women exchanged with Mr. Weinstein as evidence that the sexual encounters were consensual.
But Dr. Ziv said it is common for sexual assault victims to stay in contact with their attackers if they know or work with them. One reason, she said, is a strong desire to move past the incident. Some victims also want to avoid hurting their jobs or reputations.
Sometimes, she added, the attacker will threaten the victim into silence.
“There’s always a worry on the part of the victim that a perpetrator can invade other aspects of their life and ruin their life,” she said.