Letter of Recommendation: Lip Reading
Last winter, I found myself in a familiar position: my neck craned forward, my hearing aids hissing along to a jukebox in a Manhattan dive bar, squinting and nodding as I tried to make out what was being said by my date, a handsome, affable man who had not taken to heart my suggestion that we go somewhere quiet and well lit. Granted, I had not informed him that I have severe-to-profound high-frequency hearing loss, but it has always been easier to adapt to the impositions of the full-hearing world than it is to volunteer information about my otherwise invisible disability, which confers few advantages except, by necessity, a skill for reading lips.
Afterward, he texted me to say he admired my “presence,” or, more likely, my unwavering concentration on his mouth, which he perhaps mistook for some particular fascination with the words that sprang from it. The possibility that my circumstantial reliance on lip reading might be misread as some kind of virtue left me feeling like a scammer.
In practice, lip reading feels neither savvy nor particularly virtuous: It feels, instead, like a force of habit. It’s a skill you don’t employ consciously so much as reflexively, hoping your brain can fill in the blanks along the way. Those far more hearing-impaired than I could describe the major adjustments and concessions they make daily — not to mention the money spent on treatments like cochlear implants. But we share more intangible everyday frustrations: loud or dark restaurants, fast talkers, slow talkers, bad seats, surgical masks, subway conversations, pillow talk and the entire film genre known as mumblecore. Thankfully for hearing loss like my own, which has less to do with volume than with clarity, lip reading offers some relief from the torments, allowing my eyes to just about make up for what my ears miss.
The name is itself a misnomer, since lips aren’t read in any conventional sense of the word. The best lip readers are said to pick up only 30 to 45 percent of words as there are fewer visemes, or visually distinct units of sound, than there are phonemes, their auditory correlates (meaning the letters B and P, like K and G, sound different but look the same on someone’s lips). It is a necessarily imprecise science, a process by which the brain, with all its complex, rapid-fire circuitry, translates to one sense that which was meant for another.
In that way, lip reading is more like watching an orchestra — the coordination between the mouth, jaw, eyes, nose and throat resembling the interplay of the various instruments, culminating in the achievement of sense and, hopefully, legibility. Without a visual component, words, especially those heavy in consonants, can sound like one garbled mass to me: “Q-tips, please” as “Poughkeepsie,” misheard when I embarked on a trip to Duane Reade for a friend.
Lip reading, then, is a sort of synthesis, both effortful and intuitive, and the experience of active engagement with someone’s face reveals our bodies to be surprisingly resourceful. You match tempo to timbre, mouth shape to cadence, try to account for gestures and inflections that might contribute to the sentiment writ large, except it’s all happening simultaneously, and while the Billie Eilish song blasts from the speaker and your date takes to his gums with a toothpick. It forces you to understand speech as only one part of human expression, the conditions for which have become progressively unfavorable, either because modern life is practically defined by impediments to our attention or because people can be prickly, unaccommodating and committedly averse to making eye contact.
Recently, the lights in a stairwell went out while I was talking to a friend, who carried on with our conversation. “Wait,” I said, “I can’t hear you in the dark.” He thought I was quoting a Lorde song (it would not have been surprising if I were), but the moment and the laugh we shared lingered. The impossibility of conversations in such settings — the necessity of light, of a human face — was something I had resigned myself to, much like the frequent disharmony of speech. Lip reading, palliative as it can be, could only do so much.
I used to think hearing loss was something to be concealed as much as overcome. So I grew my hair long to cover the thin wires in my ears and watched, nevertheless, as people’s eyes shifted laterally, to one ear and then the other, their silent reactions communicating pity or discomfort. Once, recoiling at the sight, someone asked if I was recording him, even though it was me who felt vaguely surveilled.
Now, however, I like to imagine that people recognize in my straining to hear them something similar in themselves, not a deficit of attention so much as an implicit understanding that meaningful human exchange inevitably betrays the defense mechanisms of daily life. We are all, in some way or another, looking to hear and be heard, wanting for our friends and family and lovers to decipher not only what we say, but also what we don’t. Except we are revealing ourselves always, in ways both gestural and explicit, trying, literally, to cut through the noise.