Mets Name Luis Rojas Manager After Beltran’s Ouster
When Luis Rojas reported to spring training with the Mets last year, he was the first quality control coach in the team’s history. His many responsibilities included on-field coaching, like helping the utility man Jeff McNeil on his transition to the outfield, as well as streamlining how the front office communicated analytics information to the players.
“I am going to be that source that brings in the information to our coaching staff and to our players,” he said one day at the team’s facility in Port St. Lucie, Fla.
The job was another step on a steady rise through the Mets organization for Rojas. On Wednesday he took another big, unexpected leap when Mets General Manager Brodie Van Wagenen said the team was making Rojas its next manager.
“I think it’s the fit,” Van Wagenen told reporters. “It’s where the team is. I think it’s the culture we’re trying to create.”
The move came in the middle of a tumultuous off-season for the Mets. They fired Manager Mickey Callaway in October after his second season in charge and hired Carlos Beltran, a highly respected former player with no previous managing experience, as his replacement a month later.
But Beltran never made it to the clubhouse as the leader of the Mets. Last week he agreed to part ways with the team after Major League Baseball implicated him in the sign-stealing operation employed by the Houston Astros in 2017, when he was an outfielder with that club.
Beltran, who played 20 seasons in the major leagues and helped the Astros win the 2017 World Series, was the only player implicated by name in M.L.B.’s report on the cheating scheme. After multiple meetings with Van Wagenen and the team’s chief operating officer, Jeff Wilpon, last week after the report was released, Beltran and the team decided it would be best for Beltran to step down.
Enter Rojas, who was born in the Dominican Republic and has been in the organization for more than a decade after a short playing career in the minor leagues. His family has a long history in the major leagues: His father, Felipe Alou, was one of the first M.L.B. players from the Dominican Republic and had a 17-year playing career before spending 14 seasons as a big-league manager. Felipe Alou’s brothers, Matty and Jesus, also played in the majors, and his son Moises Alou — Rojas’s brother — spent the final two years of his 17-season career with the Mets.
Rojas, 38, played only at the minor league level before working his way up with the Mets. He was a manager for eight years in the minor leagues before jumping to the majors last season as part of Callaway’s coaching staff.
Players commended him for his attention to detail, and he could often be seen working with outfielders hours before the first pitch at otherwise empty stadiums. In the clubhouse, he was often seen consulting with players before and after games.
Rojas offers the organization some continuity amid the disruption, and he is familiar with the talent in the clubhouse. He managed the Class AA Binghamton Rumble Ponies, where he oversaw the development of the current major leaguers Pete Alonso and McNeil. Before that, he managed in Class A, as well as in the winter league in the Dominican Republic.
On Twitter Wednesday, Alonso, who broke the rookie record with 53 home runs last season, wrote that he was “super pumped” to have Rojas as his new boss.
Starting pitcher Marcus Stroman, whom the Mets acquired in a trade at the deadline last season, also weighed in on Twitter, writing that Rojas was “Super laid back and brings nothing but great vibes each and every day. Beyond even keel. Excited even more for the year!”
When the team dismissed Callaway, Wilpon and Van Wagenen cited the team’s failure to reach the postseason as the reasoning for their decision. While Jacob deGrom, the team’s ace, won his second consecutive Cy Young Award and Alonso was named the National League’s rookie of the year, the Mets finished in third place in the National League East, their late-season surge proving to be insufficient to make the postseason.
The Washington Nationals, who finished seven games ahead of the Mets and second in the division, went on to win the World Series.
“I feel unfulfilled,” Wilpon said after Callaway was dismissed. “I feel we left some games on the field that we should have won, and we didn’t fulfill what we really had as a goal, which was to get to the postseason.”
With less than a month until the team begins spring workouts, Rojas will take command of a clubhouse that will be expected to compete in a division that got tougher in the off-season.
For now, the team can only hope that Rojas will last long enough to do something that Beltran failed to do: manage a game in the major leagues.