Compassion, Not Patriarchy, at A.A. Meetings
To the Editor:
Re “The Patriarchy of Alcoholics Anonymous,” by Holly Whitaker (Op-Ed, Dec. 28):
For anyone who has attended more than a handful of A.A. meetings, Ms. Whitaker’s opinion that the organization is patriarchal makes little sense. While it was founded by a group of men nearly a century ago, today’s A.A. is nonhierarchical and run by diverse groups of neighborhood volunteers, including many women.
Moreover, Ms. Whitaker mischaracterizes the central tenet of A.A.’s philosophy entirely when she writes that it is designed to break people down. To the contrary, it raises people up through group therapy and community support.
To support her argument, Ms. Whitaker cavalierly claims that one of the 12 steps is “admitting powerlessness” but conveniently fails to explain that the step is actually “We admitted we were powerless over alcohol and that our lives had become unmanageable,” which changes the meaning of the phrase entirely. Going to A.A. is not a sign of weakness in any sense.
Indeed, walking into my first A.A. meeting was the single bravest thing I have ever done. I was in a terrible emotional place and I shared my story, publicly breaking into tears. The outpouring of support that I received from the others moves me to this day. Random people gave me their phone numbers and made sure to take mine. They called and texted me for weeks just to make sure I was doing O.K. The experience will renew your faith in humanity.
Through self-knowledge and community support, I am happy and sober today. And I will always be appreciative of the kind, loving, selfless volunteers of Alcoholics Anonymous who helped me get that way.
Stephen D.
Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Holly Whitaker’s blithe takedown of Alcoholics Anonymous does a grave disservice to millions in this country desperate to quit drinking or using, but too paralyzed by fear and shame to ask for help. Ms. Whitaker has given them an easy excuse to cross A.A. off their list of potential resources.
Most egregiously, she doesn’t mention that thousands of women-only A.A. groups meet every day in this country, started and run by women whose distaste for patriarchy is as fierce as Ms. Whitaker’s. There are also men-only meetings, gay-only meetings, Spanish-speaking meetings, meetings at 5 a.m., noon and midnight, meetings where everybody has a graduate degree and meetings with junkies nodding off in the corner, meetings with nobody over 20 and meetings with nobody under 65. This diversity reflects A.A.’s flexibility and ability to respond to cultural change.
Many things about A.A. irk, from the stilted 1930s syntax of its literature to its temperature-challenged (but no longer smoke-filled) church-basement meeting spaces. A.A. is not so much an organization as it is a network of affiliates, so you are free to walk out of a meeting that doesn’t work for you and find one that does.
Inside whatever meeting you wind up at, you’ll find compassionate people who know exactly how torn up you feel inside and whose only goal is to help you figure out how to start repairing the damage.
R.W. Greene
San Rafael, Calif.
To the Editor:
I am a feminist and an alcoholic sober 35 years. My life was a disaster and I could not quit drinking. Alcoholics Anonymous has done for me what I could not do for myself. By working through the 12 steps with other people like me, I was able to finally stop drinking and become the best version of myself.
Holly Whitaker missed the point. Being spiritual does not mean giving in to a patriarchal structure. It means letting go of the need to control. The irony is that when I stop fighting my ego, I am able to find my deepest power as a woman living in a patriarchal world. If women in A.A. were “expected to blame themselves, follow instructions and fall into line in a patriarchal society,” I’d have left long ago.
There is no one “right” way to do anything. Drunken women will never be able to change the patriarchy. We need to be sober and healthy to do that.
Silvia S.
Portland, Ore.