Michael Bloomberg’s Radically Conventional Campaign Against Donald Trump
Michael Bloomberg’s presidential campaign has aroused the passions of Democratic voters. Unfortunately for Bloomberg — a formerly Republican, Wall Street-friendly billionaire who, as New York City mayor, supported the racially discriminatory “stop and frisk” policing strategy — those passions are largely negative ones. These personal and ideological priors aside, many Democrats are angry that Bloomberg, who has indicated he is willing to spend as much as $1 billion of his estimated $50 billion fortune on his campaign, seems to be trying to purchase their party’s nomination. The fear is that Bloomberg’s campaign will prolong the Democratic contest and, in the end, produce a hobbled nominee — a nominee who almost certainly won’t be Bloomberg.
But there is a plausible argument that Bloomberg’s candidacy could be a boon to whoever faces Donald Trump in November. The vast bulk of his money so far has gone not into renting out arenas for campaign rallies or chartering planes to crisscross the country but into advertising: more than $200 million in less than two months. His television and radio ads represent more than three times the combined ad spending of every other Republican and Democratic presidential candidate, save for his fellow billionaire Tom Steyer, over the last year, according to the data firm Advertising Analytics.
If you’ve tuned in to the N.F.L. playoffs or the Golden Globes, or even tried to watch a Minecraft video on YouTube, you’ve probably seen Bloomberg’s ad about health care. The 60-second TV spot begins with creepy music that sounds as if it were borrowed from a horror-movie soundtrack and footage of Trump saying things like “Obamacare is a complete and total disaster” and “Let Obamacare implode.” The music then turns upbeat, and a narrator touts Bloomberg’s health-care-related accomplishments as New York’s mayor: lowering the number of uninsured and infant mortality rates, increasing life expectancy. There’s a multi­racial cast of smiling professionals in scrubs and white coats, pushing happy patients in wheelchairs and checking the heartbeats of adorable toddlers.
Health care has been the most hotly contested issue in the Democratic primary, pitting Bernie Sanders’s and Elizabeth Warren’s respective Medicare for All plans against Joe Biden’s and Pete Buttigieg’s more incremental approaches. Every Democratic debate has at some point bogged down in an exhausting argument about whether Sanders and Warren are going to have to raise taxes on the middle class to pay for their plans and if Biden and Buttigieg aren’t doing enough to guarantee universal health coverage. Bloomberg’s ad circumvents this debate entirely, making no mention of the other Democratic candidates or their plans. Although Bloomberg doesn’t favor Medicare for All, his ad — unlike those of Buttigieg — doesn’t criticize Warren and Sanders for their support of it. It is functionally a general-election ad, training its fire solely on the president.
This is the second remarkable thing about the ad: the angle of its attack on Trump. In 2016, Hillary Clinton went after Trump on characterological grounds. Her most notable ad featured images of children watching TV as Trump delivers some of his most reprehensible remarks — about Mexican “rapists” and “blood coming out of” the news anchor Megyn Kelly’s “wherever” and how he “could stand in the middle of Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody” and not lose any voters. “Our children and grandchildren will look back at this time,” Clinton says in that ad, “and we need to make sure that they can be proud of us.” Biden is now taking a similar approach. One of his ads shows footage of foreign dignitaries laughing at Trump and ends with pictures of Biden and the text, “We need a leader the world respects.”
Bloomberg would seem to share this disdain for Trump as a human being, and he has taken his own personal shots at him in the past: “I’ve built a business, and I didn’t start it with a million-dollar check from my father,” he said in his speech to the 2016 Democratic National Convention. But in 2020, he is making the Democratic case against Trump in the most traditional way possible: on Trump’s record.
Another of Bloomberg’s health care ads attacks Trump for threatening to take away voters’ insurance coverage, claiming that there are “one million more uninsured Americans every year under Trump.” In a third ad, we see Trump boasting about his administration’s efforts to promote “gun safety” before a pitiless tally of every school and university shooting that has taken place since he took office — 263 in all — flashes across the screen. Bloomberg is telling voters to vote against Trump not for nebulous reasons — providing a better role model, restoring our global standing — but for tangible ones: better insurance, keeping their children safe at school.
These ads reflect an audacious attempt to rewrite the rules of presidential primary elections. Bloomberg is skipping the first four nominating contests, in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada, and instead using his practically unlimited advertising budget to wage a national, general-election-style campaign for the Democratic nomination. But perhaps the most unconventional thing about Bloomberg’s campaign is its radically conventional treatment of Trump as a political opponent. While other Democratic candidates attack the president as an existential threat — “If Donald Trump is re-elected,” Biden says in another of his ads, “he will forever and fundamentally alter the character of this nation” — Bloomberg focuses on more immediate and prosaic concerns.
“He just doesn’t care if you have a pre-existing condition,” Bloomberg says of Trump in one of his ads. “He wants to deny you access to coverage. If he is re-elected, he’ll keep trying to do that.” It’s a criticism that could be — and has been — leveled at practically any Republican, and it signals to Democrats Bloomberg’s conviction that the best way to beat Trump is the tried-and-true one. Trump himself seems alarmed, recently posting on Twitter that “Mini Mike Bloomberg is spending a lot of money on False Advertising” before going on to misleadingly claim that he has tried to protect coverage for people with pre-existing conditions. Bloomberg is so sure of his theory that if he does not win the Democratic nomination, he has pledged to continue his anti-Trump campaign on behalf of whoever does.
Ever since Bloomberg announced in November that he was entering the race, his critics have been complaining about what he’s not spending his money on to get rid of Trump — funding a major voter-registration drive, for instance, or buying Fox News. The more creative and out-of-the-box use of his fortune, the better. But Bloomberg is betting that desperate times call for ho-hum measures, albeit ho-hum measures executed at gargantuan scale. With enough money and enough ads, he hopes to normalize Trump on the way to defeating him.