Leader of Right-Wing Border Militia Pleads Guilty to Federal Gun Charge
The leader of a right-wing militia that was detaining migrant families at gunpoint near the border in southern New Mexico pleaded guilty this week to a federal gun charge, Justice Department officials said.
The leader, Larry Mitchell Hopkins, who has also operated under the alias Johnny Horton Jr., faces up to 10 years in prison after he admitted Thursday to being in possession of several firearms and various caliber ammunition in November 2017, despite being a felon, the United States Attorney’s Office for the District of New Mexico said in a statement.
Mr. Hopkins, 70, of Flora Vista, N.M., had previously been convicted in at least three states of multiple crimes, including illegal weapon possession and impersonating a peace officer in 2006, according to the plea agreement.
In a statement on Friday, Hector Balderas, the attorney general for New Mexico, said, “Felons should never possess dangerous firearms or illegally pose as law enforcement officials, and I am pleased that this individual is being held accountable.”
Kelly O’Connell, Mr. Hopkins’s lawyer, said Friday that he and his client, who has been in custody since his arrest last April, wanted a plea deal because of health concerns.
“He’s got physical debilitating ailments,” Mr. O’Connell said. “He says that he’s got heart problems now, diabetes, a lot of other things, too.”
At the time of Mr. Hopkins’s arrest, there was speculation that it could lead to a deep investigation of his activities and those of the militia, known as the United Constitutional Patriots. The United States Attorney’s Office for the District of New Mexico declined to comment on Friday about whether it was looking to the organization or if the group was still even active in the region.
Mr. O’Connell said the group probably no longer existed and his client was not really in touch with it, but he said he could not confirm if Mr. Hopkins was still considered the leader.
Asked if Mr. Hopkins planned to return to his prior border activities, Mr. O’Connell said, “I think he’s going to develop a new hobby.”

Mr. Hopkins was arrested last year as the United Constitutional Patriots faced criticism for its tactics and tensions were rising over ultraconservative paramilitary groups operating along the southwestern border.
In videos uploaded online, armed members of Mr. Hopkins’s organization are seen detaining children and their parents in the desert before handing the migrants over to the United States Border Patrol.
The Southern Poverty Law Center describes Mr. Hopkins’s organization as a border militia using “conspiracy theories and President Donald Trump’s assertions that immigrants are invading the United States to justify their actions, some of which are illegal.”

The group’s last post on its own Facebook page asking for money or supplies was made last July.