When Dressing for Work is Part of the Job
Barneys New York and Opening Ceremony may be closing, but fashion e-tailers are doing just fine. Last fall, Moda Operandi, the luxury site where customers can order clothes directly off the runways of fashion week, opened a 30,000-square-foot office in Industry City in Brooklyn.
It serves as the company’s creative hub, and scores of Moda Operandi’s 350 employees can be found there arranging shoots, styling clothes and writing code. Here’s what some wore to work on a recent Friday.
Age: “43? I’m guessing.”
Occupation: co-founder and chief brand officer
So you’re the Gwyneth to this Goop?
That’s a nice analogy. Sure.
What’s the skirt?
It’s the Row. Great American tailoring. We launched it on Moda a couple seasons ago. I love their point of view.
What have you matched it with?
My top is also the Row.
Do you get a discount or something?
Yes. My shoes are also the Row.
Your work boots?
They’ve got a practical heel, wouldn’t you say? When I started working at Vogue, we wore stiletto heels every day. Compared to those days this is quite evolved.
Age: 23
Occupation: fashion editor
Nice camo.
These are my favorite vintage RRL camouflage cargoes, given to me by the fashion director here, Josh Peskowitz.
He’s giving you his old clothes?
I get his hand-me-downs. They have a great story: They’re from the first or second RRL collection. He wore them to death and passed them on to me.
That’s kind, I guess.
I’m wearing them with a cashmere sweater from the Row.
The Row? They must pay you very well here.
They do not. But I got to go to the friends-and-family sale and it was 90 percent off.
That must be the hottest ticket in fashion.
It got violent at times. This is actually women’s.
Age: 46
Occupation: head of talent
How do you dress for work?
I think about comfort first.
Really? Even at Moda Operandi?
Well, comfort and style are not mutually exclusive. I have on classic Prada pumps, which are surprising very comfortable.
Why does every woman say that their heels are comfortable, when they’re clearly not?
They’re not telling the truth. But there are some heels that are comfortable. It can come down to fit and quality. I’m a sneakers girl. I wore sneakers on my commute today.
Age: 34
Occupation: buying director of women’s wear
A leather coat topped with a sweater. I’m not sure I’ve seen that look before.
It’s a vegan leather blazer by Nanushka. It’s got a lot of attitude.
What about your jeans?
My jeans are Slvrlake. Their fits are exceptional.
What makes a good blouse for you?
I’m quite European in that you can generally see a flash of lingerie. I’ve got the Khaite knitted bra underneath.
Is that what Europeans do?
We generally have a hint of bra.
What do Americans do? A hint of J. Crew sweater?
It’s very different here.
Age: 43
Occupation: chief executive officer
You’re the C.E.O. and you’re rolling around here in a sweatsuit.
Separates, though. It’s not a onesie.
What if you had a big meeting?
Same deal: investors, board meeting, doesn’t matter.
Does that put people off kilter?
There’s a way to dress down and still dress smart.
Is this your uniform?
It’s pretty much in the hot zone of my look.
Hot zone? Where are your shoes from?
This is a very limited-edition Converse with Schott NYC. I’m a sneakerhead, but who isn’t these days?
Age: “Age is a construct”
Occupation: director of innovation
I like your fuzzy beret.
Vintage Sonia Rykiel, R.I.P. I have over 100 eBay alerts for different vintage things: clothing, décor, all kinds of stuff.
Is that what you do all day here?
No, but when you want to shop vintage you have to be super-prepared.
Your dress looks like something worn by a Victorian girl who was murdered by her nurse.
One hundred percent! Stacey Nishomoto. She’s the creative genius behind this line that’s well known in arty-girl circles called the Corner Store.
What’s on your feet?
The shoes are Chanel. Classic. And the anklets my boyfriend had made for me at New Top in Chinatown.
Age: 27
Occupation: senior data scientist
You’re dressed very cool for a data scientist.
Well, I work in fashion and tech.
What did you like first: data or fashion?
Don’t tell my boss, but fashion.
Tell me about your jacket.
It’s from Nanushka. It’s vegan leather, it’s so soft. I love the laid-back style. The skirt is vegan leather from Nanushka as well.
What about your turtleneck underneath?
It’s from & Other Stories. The color is warm for winter.
Age: 26
Occupation: product writer
That’s a very chunky turtleneck.
Turtlenecks are mainly what makes up my wardrobe: gray, cream, white and black.
Why?
I’m always cold, and I love having my neck covered and being able to tuck in my hair. I love the Norwegian, minimalistic way of dressing. They call it hygge.
Do you feel any pressure to dress a certain way here?
Sometimes, maybe like 20 percent pressure. But mostly, we enjoy it.
Those are chunky shoes.
These are the new Pradas. They’re basically my children. They’re a little bit goth, which is kind of what I’m into.
What kind of music do you listen to?
Metal.
Age: 35
Occupation: private client adviser
I like your Raf Simons Calvin Klein turtleneck.
I have it in every color possible. I don’t like to wear coats, so I wore just this.
Don’t you get overheated in the office?
I’ll step out from time to time. My colleagues will ask, “Are you ready for a stroll?” And I’ll say “God, yes.”
And you’re wearing a denim tunic by Jacquemus.
It’s a little difficult to get on. I don’t know if you wear a lot of tunics.
I do not. I see you’ve rolled up your pants.
I tell my clients: If you show your wrists and you show your ankles, you look taller.
I can’t tell if your shoes are a tasseled loafer or chunky sneaker.
They’re Margiela. It’s when sportswear meets office wear meets alien wear.
And your two-tone socks?
They’re Jacquemus as well. Overpriced. They were like $45. But as I always say, “If it fits, it ships.”