Altadena, Calif.: Open Spaces Above the Sprawl of Los Angeles
ALTADENA, Calif. — Pinky Farnum and her husband, Mark Nishibayashi, have loved Altadena for a very long time.
Ms. Farnum and Mr. Nishibayashi, both 33, first met when they were 11 at the Tom Sawyer-Becky Thatcher Day Camp, a summer-camp fixture in the San Gabriel Valley located at the border of the communities of Pasadena, La Cañada Flintridge and Altadena. They returned as counselors in high school, and began dating at 17.
After leaving Los Angeles for college — she to Philadelphia, he to Washington State — the couple moved in together in 2013, renting a 500-square-foot guesthouse in hipster-friendly Highland Park. But Ms. Farnum, who runs a floral business, and Mr. Nishibayashi, an environmental scientist, both missed the open air and boundless spaces of their childhood. So they headed back to Altadena, a quiet, unincorporated community filled with historic mansions and streets that seem to head directly into the looming San Gabriel Mountains.
“We both really enjoy being out in nature, and being able to get outside,” said Ms. Farnum. “That’s just one of the reasons Altadena is so appealing.”
Last summer, they paid $840,000 for a three-bedroom, two-bath bungalow in Altadena’s historic Janes Village neighborhood, a cluster of about 200 heritage homes designed by Elisha Janes in the 1920s. Theirs has a cheery yellow facade, a blue front door and a towering elm tree in front.
“It’s just a happy house,” she said. “It has large windows and gets great natural light.” Built in 1937, the home has upgraded electrical wiring and copper plumbing to go with its original flooring. They built an addition in the back that now serves as Ms. Farnum’s work space, and with the extra space they say they are ready to start a family.
Altadena, which according to the latest U.S. census data is 54 percent white, 22 percent black, 28 percent Hispanic or Latino and 7 percent Asian, is the sort of community they’d like to raise a child in. The present-day diversity is a result of white flight in the 1960s and 1970s; the white families who stayed behind, and the African-American families who moved in, were committed to creating a more integrated community.
“We wanted to be somewhere that felt diverse, and the area of Altadena that we came into is extremely diverse, both socioeconomically and racially,” said Ms. Farnum, who is white. (Mr. Nishibayashi is half white and half Japanese). “When it comes to starting a family, we wanted to be somewhere where not everyone looks like us.”
For Kerin Cantwell, 56, the journey to Altadena was less deliberate. Ms. Cantwell, a lawyer, had been renting a home in nearby Pasadena for 10 years after separating from her husband. With her two children grown and her finances in order, she was ready to re-enter the housing market, and looked almost exclusively in the Pasadena, Eagle Rock and Sierra Madre communities.
“I thought of Altadena as being too far away,” Ms. Cantwell said. She works in the city of Rosemead, 20 minutes southeast of Pasadena, and she was hesitant to add time to an already tough commute. But after she was outbid on a home in Pasadena, she wandered into an open house in Altadena and found a three-bedroom, two-bath home with a private guest unit that was perfect for when her children came to visit. Better yet, it was priced below market value by an owner hoping for a quick sell. She offered $845,000 and quickly brought in a contractor to rip out the garage floors, which a previous owner had painted lime green.
Her new community has come to surprise her. “I work in a very urban area and I just love coming up the hill at the end of the day and seeing the mountains right there,” Ms. Cantwell said, noting that the mountains were covered in snow at the end of December. “And Altadena has changed. It’s got all these cool little restaurants and coffee places now. It’s a nice mix of things.”
Altadena is wedged against the foothills of the Angeles National Forest, with its northern slopes branching into a patchwork of hiking trails, including Altadena Crest, Henninger Flats and Camp Huntington Trailhead.
It sits just north of Pasadena, home of the Rose Bowl Stadium and the storied Rose Parade on New Year’s Day; and just to the east of La Cañada Flintridge, home to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the NASA research and development center.
Its neighborhoods include Janes Village, dominated by Tudor-style homes, and Millionaire’s Row, a series of wide, handsome estates on Mariposa Street whose owners have included the publishing magnate Andrew McNally and the author Zane Grey.
Along the commercial drag of Lake Avenue, locals gather at Fox’s Restaurant, a diner and landmark that’s been in operation for more than 60 years, as well as several coffee shops and the friendly Rancho Bar; both The Los Angeles Times and L.A. Weekly have gushed over Bulgarini Gelato, just off Lake.
Prices in Altadena are slowly rising. In 2017, 372 single-family homes sold at a median price of $820,000. The following year, 396 single-family homes sold at a median price of $831,000. As of the final week of 2019, there had been 367 single-family homes sold during the year, at a median price of $871,000, according to the Combined LA/Westside Multiple Listing Service.
For renters, a one-bedroom condo can be found for $1,800; a two-bedroom house will rent for about $2,500, and a four-bedroom house will cost around $4,000 a month.
“Altadena is a very diverse, eclectic kind of place,” said Tracy King, 71, a realtor with Compass Real Estate who lives and specializes in Altadena. “You have a strong contingent of people who are buying here because they’ve been priced out of metro Los Angeles, and it’s not that far from downtown. And for the same money they could pay in Silver Lake, they get a house and a lot more land here.”
Altadena, Ms. King said, has managed to avoid the swift-moving gentrification that has transformed other communities in northeast Los Angeles, despite its slow creep in prices. That’s largely thanks to geography, bounded as it is by wilderness on three sides.
Jani and Becky Zandovskis, who bought a two-bedroom, two-bath house with wide front and backyards in Altadena for $777,000 in October, agreed that the community’s end-of-the-world feeling has helped maintain its character.
“It’s tucked up at the edge of civilization,” said Mr. Zandovskis, 48, a freelance camera operator. He and his wife moved to the area from Highland Park, he said, after growing tired of cramped urban life. “We really liked how it’s up near the hills, and it just feels like it’s not part of Los Angeles.”
Students in Altadena are served by the Pasadena Unified School District. Public elementary schools in the district include Jackson Elementary, Franklin Elementary, Altadena Elementary and Daniel Webster Elementary.
During the 2018-19 school year, 49 percent of third-graders at Jackson, 27 percent of third-graders at Franklin, 38 percent of third-graders at Altadena and 64 percent of third-graders at Daniel Webster met benchmarks for English language arts on the California Smarter Balanced Assessment test, compared with 48 percent districtwide and 49 percent across California.
During the same year, 51 percent of third-graders at Jackson, 16 percent of third-graders at Franklin, 25 percent of third-graders at Altadena and 49 percent of third-graders at Daniel Webster met benchmarks in math, compared with 49 percent districtwide and 50 percent statewide. (According to the California Department of Education, students with scores at or above benchmark levels on these tests are ready for higher-level coursework).
For high school, most students attend either John Muir High School, Pasadena High School or Marshall Fundamental, which serves grades six through 12.
During the 2017-18 school year, 54 percent of students at John Muir, 75 percent of students at Marshall Fundamental and 76 percent of students at Pasadena who took the SAT exam met benchmarks for English, compared with 70 percent districtwide and 71 percent statewide; 32 percent of students at John Muir, 51 percent of students at Marshall Fundamental and 52 percent of students at Pasadena met benchmarks for math, compared with 46 percent districtwide and 51 percent statewide. (For the SATs, the College Board defines students as “college ready” when their test scores meet a benchmark of 480 in English and 530 in math).
Altadena is a 10-minute drive from Pasadena; the 30- to 40-minute drive to Downtown Los Angeles can take up to 90 minutes in traffic; Los Angeles International Airport is 40 minutes away, though with traffic the drive can take up to two hours.
The Iowan brothers John and Fred Woodbury began developing Altadena in the 1880s, selling the land they had purchased to socialites who were eager for a piece of California with clean air and access to nature. They also planted trees and orchards, whose beauty — along with the fresh mountain air of the area — lured millionaires like Andrew McNally and William Kellogg to the area.