Epoch Times, Punished by Facebook, Gets a New Megaphone on YouTube
SAN FRANCISCO — Late last summer, YouTube users began noticing a surge of ads for an obscure news outlet called The Epoch Times. One ad touted an exposé of “Spygate,” a baseless conspiracy theory alleging that President Barack Obama and his allies placed a spy inside President Trump’s 2016 campaign. Another praised Mr. Trump’s interest in buying Greenland as a shrewd strategic move. A third claimed that the opioid epidemic in the United States was the result of a chemical warfare plot by the Chinese Communist Party.
“Anyone else getting a lot of Epoch Times ads?” a user on a YouTube-themed Reddit forum wrote.
“Every other ad on YouTube is a commercial for The Epoch Times pushing Trump,” wrote a Twitter user.
The ads, which sometimes ran for several minutes apiece, were a potpourri of right-wing polemics wrapped in “subscribe now” appeals. They seemed to be everywhere, running alongside videos of pranks, sports highlights and gaming streams. They claimed that The Epoch Times was “America’s fastest growing newspaper” and that, unlike the biased mainstream media, it would provide readers with the unvarnished truth.
The Epoch Times is one of the most mysterious fixtures of the pro-Trump media universe. It was started 20 years ago as a print newspaper by practitioners of Falun Gong, the persecuted Chinese spiritual practice. In recent years, the paper has made inroads into top Republican circles. Mr. Trump and his advisers have shared Epoch Times articles on their social media accounts, and last year, Lara Trump, the president’s daughter-in-law, sat for an interview with an Epoch Times editor. Representative Paul Gosar, a Republican from Arizona, called it “our favorite paper.”
The outlet’s profile was initially raised by a spending spree on Facebook — where it paid more than $1 million to promote its content. But in August, Facebook caught The Epoch Times trying to evade its advertising transparency rules and barred it from taking out more ads.
Rather than retreating, the publication simply shifted to a different platform — YouTube — and continued its advertising blitz there.
The shifting tactics of partisan publishers pose a challenge to tech platforms in the lead-up to the 2020 election. Despite their efforts to limit the spread of misinformation, the platforms remain a powerful megaphone for publishers like The Epoch Times, which has used conspiracy theories and dubious growth tactics to expand its audience.
In all, the outlet has spent more than $1 million on YouTube ads, according to a person familiar with its spending, who discussed private information on the condition of anonymity.
In addition, data from Pathmatics, a social media analytics firm, suggests that The Epoch Times’s YouTube spending increased sharply in the months after Facebook banned its ads, and that its ads are reaching more people than many mainstream news organizations are. Gabe Gottlieb, the chief executive of Pathmatics, estimated that the outlet’s YouTube spending was “higher than household names like The New York Times, CNN, Fox News and The Wall Street Journal.”
In an email exchange, Stephen Gregory, the publisher of the English-language Epoch Times in the United States, declined to comment on its YouTube budget or the number of its subscribers. He characterized the YouTube ads as “profitable” and said, “We advertise on YouTube because the advertisements are effective at selling Epoch Times newspaper subscriptions.”
Little is known about The Epoch Times’s finances and organizational structure. The nonprofit Epoch Times Association, which operates it, reported $8.1 million in revenue and $7.2 million in expenses on its 2017 public tax filings. An investigation by NBC News last summer found ties between the outlet and other Falun Gong-affiliated organizations, such as the Shen Yun dance performance series and the video broadcaster NTD, and said the organizations “appear to share missions, money and executives.”
Three former Epoch Times employees, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they feared retaliation from the organization, said the outlet had long been financed by subscriptions, advertising and private donations. They described its staff as primarily Falun Gong practitioners, many of whom had little previous experience in journalism. Editorial employees, they said, were encouraged to attend weekly “Fa study” sessions outside work hours, during which they would gather to study the teachings of Falun Gong’s spiritual leader, Li Hongzhi.
The Epoch Times has long denied having direct ties to Falun Gong. Mr. Gregory said that the organization was primarily funded through subscriptions and ads, and that “donations are a small part of our income.”
The outlet’s heavy spending online, coupled with its unconventional background and its charged partisan content, has raised eyebrows among social media watchdogs.
“It’s quite strange,” said Nick Monaco, a disinformation researcher at the Institute for the Future, a tech research group in Palo Alto, Calif. “You don’t expect a media outlet to do this big of a push around an election.”
Companies like Facebook and Google, which owns YouTube, have hardened their defenses to prevent another Russian-style influence campaign. But they have been more lenient with publishers based in the United States, out of concern that they will appear to be taking sides and stepping on the First Amendment.
That reluctance has set off worries about a rise in so-called domestic disinformation, and left a loophole for American organizations to push partisan messages with relative impunity. The New York Times reported last month that Russian trolls were already trying to exploit this loophole by buying Facebook pages from Americans in an attempt to influence the 2020 election.
There is no indication that The Epoch Times is coordinating with foreign entities, but its aggressive growth tactics have drawn scrutiny. Facebook cut off the outlet’s ability to buy ads after finding that it obscured the source of its spending. The social network also took action against TheBL, a network of Facebook pages that was promoted through fake accounts, many of which had profile pictures generated with artificial intelligence. Facebook said it had found connections between TheBL and Epoch Media Group.
Mr. Gregory denied that The Epoch Times was linked to TheBL. He said it had been started by the former head of The Epoch Times’s Vietnamese affiliate, with whom his paper had since cut ties.
The Epoch Times can no longer advertise on Facebook, but it can still post there. On Monday, it published a story containing unproven suggestions of voter fraud ahead of the Iowa caucuses. The story was later debunked by fact checkers, but it received tens of thousands of likes, shares and comments.
YouTube appears to be friendlier turf than Facebook for The Epoch Times. Google, the parent company, features stories from The Epoch Times in its Google News search results. And the company does not require news publishers to disclose their spending on political ads, giving an added layer of privacy.
A YouTube spokeswoman, Charlotte Smith, confirmed that the platform has a carve-out for news publishers in its advertising transparency rules.
The Epoch Times was formed in part to speak out against the Chinese government’s persecution of Falun Gong practitioners. Anticommunist China coverage is still featured prominently, but the publication has expanded to include a range of news, lifestyle and opinion pieces. Around the time of the 2016 election, it began running more articles supportive of Mr. Trump and critical of his opponents.
“I’m not exactly clear why they have become such a major pro-Trump voice,” said Haifeng Huang, a professor of political science at the University of California, Merced. “The reason may be multifaceted, but part of it is perhaps because they regard President Trump as tough on the Chinese government and therefore a natural ally for them.”
Mr. Gregory said, “We are independent and focus on truthful reporting, including on the Trump administration.”
Many ads for The Epoch Times appear to be aimed at older conservatives who have rejected the mainstream media as being too biased and left-wing. In one ad, two actors decide to buy subscriptions as holiday gifts for their parents. Another ad says the paper has just increased its font size by 20 percent.
That Epoch Times ad, a three-minute subscription appeal called “Truth, Tradition and Crosswords,” stars an employee, Roman Balmakov. Mr. Balmakov was previously the circulation manager; according to Mr. Gregory, he is now being trained as a video journalist.
“Are you tired of the media spinning the truth and pushing false narratives upon you?” Mr. Balmakov asks in the video. He goes on to explain that “while the mainstream media has been pushing the whole ‘Trump colluding with Russia’ narrative, The Epoch Times has been covering Spygate, the true story of collusion.”
The ad has been viewed more than 20 million times.