Talking to Boys (and Girls) About Sex
To the Editor:
Re “Will We Ever Learn How to Talk About Sex?” (Sunday Review, Jan. 12):
As Peggy Orenstein asserts, school-based programs and parental conversations that focus primarily on averting physical risk and danger — unwanted pregnancy, sexually transmitted disease, sexual assault — indirectly encourage a sadly, even tragically, low bar for sexual decision-making and expectation: So long as people use “protection” and ensure mutual consent, many young people reason, then, duh, why not just do it?
Missing from the discourse is an exploration of the human dimensions of sexual connection and its potential to create meaning, joy, mutual pleasure and unparalleled levels of physical and emotional intimacy. We tell young people what we want them to say no to, but not all the things we want them, eventually, to say yes to.
What heartens me is that deep down girls and boys know that they are receiving a partial message at best. Like the research Ms. Orenstein mentions, I’ve asked my high school students for years to think about what they want, rather than what prevailing social norms seem to dictate they should want.
Using Martin Buber’s classic distinction between “I-It” and “I-Thou” relationships as a guide, I ask them to anonymously choose the relationship context for sexual behavior they most desire. Both girls and boys overwhelmingly choose genuine intimacy, results I then share.
What a gift to boys especially, who as Ms. Orenstein points out, most often view their desire for intimacy as a “personal quirk” not shared by their male peers.
By default, absent these conversations, we encourage young people — boys and girls — to “settle” for far less than they truly want and deserve.
Deborah M. Roffman
Baltimore
The writer is a human sexuality teacher and the author of “Talk to Me First: Everything You Need to Know to Become Your Kids’ ‘Go-To Person’ About Sex.”
To the Editor:
As a young man, I think that Peggy Orenstein’s observations are spot on. Her decision to present those observations to a wider audience and spark a public conversation is a welcome one.
If she makes anything clear, it is that boys and young men are struggling to navigate society’s confusing, conflicting and unhealthy demands and expectations. I worry that many of my peers will dismiss much-needed guidance if it is presented to them as yet another ultimatum.
Peter Ferro
Endwell, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Peggy Orenstein asks us to reassess how we talk to boys about sex. She’s right in how difficult this is, how important it is to include girls, how young men want good guidance and how valuable frankness is.
But more important is giving similar consideration to the meaning of love in the education of young people. How can we talk about sex without a consideration of love? How can we address the distorted images of love and sex in entertainment media?
How can we not give frank guidance about love in a culture so saturated in sex? How can we not recognize our need to truly understand love?
Gary Gaffney
Cincinnati
To the Editor:
This really isn’t hard. You just treat it like science and start early.
I knew I had achieved something when my son told me that I was like no other mother he knew because I talked about sex at the dinner table.
I raised two great boys who do not seem to have been traumatized by my approach to things. They both have healthy relationships and I hope that they are still talking about sex.
Jane McCall
Delta, British Columbia
To the Editor:
The sad irony is that women’s greater sexual freedom and economic rights did not translate into more respect for women.
Sex has always been tied up with power, dominance and control. As our culture, led by Wall Street, began generating men with a lot of money and wealth, there was also a very visible shift, with sex openly being used and pursued with greater aggressiveness.
It is no coincidence that the hookup culture is predominantly on college campuses, where, unchecked as “boys will be boys,” the problem perpetuates through the next generation.
R.M. Shaker
New York