Lesson of the Day: ‘Trump Administration Adds Six Countries to Travel Ban’
Featured Article: “Trump Administration Adds Six Countries to Travel Ban” by Zolan Kanno-Youngs
In 2017, the Trump administration enacted a travel ban from seven Muslim-majority countries, arguing that it was necessary for the safety and security of the United States. The ban was later revised, and on Friday, the administration added six more countries to the list: Africa’s most populous country, Nigeria, as well as Myanmar, Eritrea, Kyrgyzstan, Sudan and Tanzania.
In this lesson, you’ll learn more about the policy, including the rationale behind it and criticism of it. Then you’ll form your own opinion based on statistics and first-person accounts.
What do you know about President Trump’s travel ban, which was enacted in 2017 and was recently expanded to restrict immigration from six more countries, four of them in Africa? Have you or has anyone you know been affected by it?
For more background information, read this excerpt from the featured article:
Then read this excerpt about the recent expansion:
Highlight or list the key information in these excerpts that helps you understand the travel ban. See if you can summarize the main idea of these excerpts in one or two sentences. Then write down any questions you still have. If you’re in a classroom, share your thoughts with a partner and discuss.
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. What was the Trump administration’s rationale for enacting the ban in 2017? What does it say its reasons are for the recent expansion of it?
2. Nigeria is the country likely to be most affected by this expansion. What does Lai Mohammed, Nigeria’s minister of information and culture, mean when he says it would be a “double jeopardy” for the country?
3. Beyond the travel ban, how else has Mr. Trump restricted immigration into the United States? What role might politics play in these policies?
4. Why are refugees especially vulnerable under this newly expanded immigration ban?
5. What reasons do Democrats give for opposing the ban?
6. The article includes an example of how this travel ban has affected travelers of Iranian descent, including American citizens and permanent residents. What does this example tell us about the potential consequences of travel bans like this one?
7. What is your reaction to the travel ban? Is it warranted? Is it constitutional? Is it in the best interests of the United States or the global community? Explain your thinking using evidence from the article.
Option 1: By the Numbers
Using the statistics from this article or your own research, create a “by the numbers” infographic to show the scale and impact of the travel ban. For example, you might include the number of countries included in the ban, the number of people it will affect or the number of refugee admissions allowed. You don’t need to include every statistic, just those you think are most important.
Then study your graphic and reflect on what stands out to you. What do you notice? What trends surface? How does this put the travel ban into perspective for you or help you think about it differently? What is your opinion of the travel ban, based on this information?
Option 2: Family Separations
At the end of the article Doug Rand, who worked on immigration policy in the Obama White House and helped found Boundless Immigration, a technology company that helps immigrants obtain green cards, said that this policy “has become a de facto family separation policy besides the obvious one at the border” and that it “will just magnify the pain to extend it to other countries.”
Explore one or more of these pieces to see how the travel ban is affecting families:
How do you see Mr. Rand’s statement playing out in these first-person accounts? How is the travel ban affecting families? Can you relate to this experience? Has your family ever been separated for any reason? What was that like for you?
Do these stories or your own experiences influence your opinion of the travel ban? If so, how so? If not, why not?