Want to Criticize Singapore? Expect a ‘Correction Notice’
SINGAPORE — When the ruling People’s Action Party (P.A.P.) passed a new law against “fake news” last year, it claimed to want to protect both free speech and national security. Falsehoods, the government said, “have been weaponized, to attack the infrastructure of fact, destroy trust and attack societies.”
Since the law came into force in October, the government has invoked it five times, and there is now reason to fear that the law is, instead, a tool to quiet dissent.
Last Thursday, the one target of the law that so far has dared to challenge it in court, the opposition Singapore Democratic Party, argued that an interpretation of data couldn’t be considered a “deliberate falsehood.” (Or so we, journalists, have been told: The hearings aren’t open to the public.) On Friday, the deputy attorney general apparently argued that the S.D.P.’s analysis of unemployment statistics could be considered fake news so long as some people risked misunderstanding it. The government had previously claimed that the party’s “false and misleading statements” had a “singular objective”: to “stoke fear and anxiety” among local white-collar professionals.
The Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation Act, better known as Pofma, outlaws “false statements of fact” that, among other things, are “prejudicial” to security, public health and Singapore’s external relations or that might “diminish public confidence” in the government’s performance. The law grants government ministers the power to issue “correction notices” to the people or groups they claim have published falsehoods. Alternatively, the law allows offending content to be removed or blocked, and for online users or readers to be directed to a government source instead.
Noncompliance is punishable by fines (of up to $15,000 for individuals and more than $740,000 for companies) and up to one year in prison. The correction notices must be posted when the government asks for them, even if the recipients object: A Pofma order can only be invalidated by the High Court.
Every order so far has been directed at an opposition party or politician, or a government critic.
Target of order No. 1: Brad Bowyer, a member of the Progress Singapore Party, a new party, for a Facebook post in which he criticized investment decisions by Singapore’s sovereign wealth funds. The prime minister of Singapore is the chairman of the board of one fund; his wife is the C.E.O. of another.
Target No. 2: the States Times Review, a website critical of the ruling party, for a Facebook post claiming that the home affairs minister had ordered the arrest of an individual who had disclosed the religious affiliation of a potential P.A.P. candidate.
After the website’s publisher — a resident of Australia — refused to post the government’s correction notice, the government ordered Facebook to post it instead. (Order No. 3.) Facebook complied.
No. 4: an order from the minister of manpower against the S.D.P. for various posts and an online article claiming that unemployment was rising among Singaporean white-collar workers.
And then, the subject of order No. 5: Lim Tean, the leader of People’s Voice, another fledgling political party, for online posts stating that the government had put aside more money for scholarships for foreign students than for local ones.
All these statements and analyses touched on sensitive issues — questioning the competence of the elites, tapping people’s anxieties about immigration and jobs — and at a time when many Singaporeans suspect that the government will call general elections well before April 2021, the month by which they must be held. Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, who has been in power since 2004, has indicated that this race will be his last, and the ruling party seems intent on securing another strong mandate.
But never mind politics, the P.A.P. has claimed, or the fact that Pofma has only been invoked against government opponents so far. That’s merely a “coincidence.”
When it proposed the law, the P.A.P. government had argued that it was necessary to ensure a speedy response to online falsehoods, pointing to cases, such as in Sri Lanka, where a failure to correct disinformation had led to violence. Yet none of the cases in Singapore so far have had anything to do with any incitement to harm. Nor has the government treated them as an emergency that required handling in a matter of hours, as it claimed would be necessary. Most of the correction orders came days — in one case, as many as 12 days — after the supposedly false information was published.
There’s also the matter of whether the P.A.P. government is challenging only statements of fact or also arguments and opinions. Mr. Lim’s Facebook posts — one of them a meme — were comments on the amount of scholarship money set aside for Singaporean versus foreign students. The education ministry’s correction order actually confirmed the sums that Mr. Lim mentioned, arguing instead that he should have made “a more appropriate comparison.”
On Friday, during a hearing in the S.D.P. case, the attorney general’s office argued that Pofma also covered implied statements and matters of interpretation.
And to top it all off: Pofma cannot be used to correct any falsehoods published by the government — not unless you can convince a minister from the P.A.P. to act against the party. How’s that for a measure that might “diminish public confidence” in the government’s performance?