A Video Tweeted by Pompeo Was Authentic. His Description Was Misleading.
The video lasted only 22 seconds but its message seemed clear, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo wanted the world to know, so he posted it to  Twitter  for his 1.1 million followers.
“Iraqis — Iraqis — dancing in the street for freedom; thankful that General Soleimani is no more,” Mr. Pompeo wrote.
The video was authentic, but Mr. Pompeo’s description of it was exaggerated.
Witnesses in Iraq said that only a handful of men carrying Iraqi flags had run — not danced — along a road while the voice of a man speaking near the camera was heard praising the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani of Iran in a targeted United States airstrike on Friday at Baghdad International Airport.
The man whose voice is heard in the video exclaims that General Suleimani’s death has avenged the deaths of Iraqis protesting Iran’s presence in their country.
The witnesses said the men carrying the flags were celebrating General Suleimani’s death but that the group was very small — about 30 to 40 people in a crowd of thousands — that no one else joined in and that the minor demonstration was over in less than two minutes.
Later the same day, the American attack was denounced from the main stage of the protests as a violation of Iraqi sovereignty. Several protesters said they objected to American military intervention in Iraq as much as they objected to Iranian meddling.
Mr. Pompeo’s tweet, widely shared, is an example of how misleading information spreads in the age of social media when people are quick to accept and promote information that validates their own world views. The acceptance of online images like the video Mr. Pompeo posted also helps to explain how facts themselves have become subjects for debate and political polarization epidemic.
The State Department spokeswoman, Morgan Ortagus, declined to comment on the video.
The original video, and the earliest version that appeared online, was posted on a Facebook page at 8:41 p.m. Thursday Eastern Standard Time. That Facebook user uploaded the same video six times over 10 hours. One of the six was then picked up by Storyful, which verifies and publishes material from social media. Storyful contacted the uploader via Facebook Messenger to confirm that the person had recorded the video in Tahrir Square in Baghdad and had posted it.
The goal with a tweet like that is to create a narrative and editorialize, said Joan Donovan, a lecturer at Harvard who specializes in protest communication. This typically occurs in the first few days of an event — when those with a vested interest hope to score the dominant narrative to shape how the story of a historical moment is shared, she said.
“Twitter has become a premier forum for international and foreign relations, where world leaders are subtweeting about impending war,” she added.
As soon as the news of the airstrike was confirmed, foreign leaders took to Twitter to post their reactions. Mr. Pompeo’s tweet — sent six hours after the killing — appears to have been a great success.
Almost 24 hours after his message was first posted, it has been retweeted more than 53,000 times, re-shared by hundreds of accounts in multiple languages, including the United States’ State Department’s Farsi Twitter account. The video in the tweet has been viewed almost five million times.
In all, the post has been liked and shared more than 30,000 times across Facebook, Twitter and Reddit, according to Crowdtangle, a social analytics tool owned by Facebook. On YouTube, the video was shared by individuals and organizations, including RT, Russia’s state-sponsored news outlet.
“When we think about government communication, it’s public diplomacy in peacetime, propaganda in wartime,” said Jennifer Grygiel, an assistant professor of communication at Syracuse University who studies state media. “Official sources can propagate a narrative they seek without context.”
That is occurring, Professor Grygiel said, because of the breakdown of gatekeeping, a role typically played by the news media. President Trump and his supporters have fostered that breakdown by regularly dismissing fair and factual reporting. Now, governments, the platforms and ordinary citizens all participate in public diplomacy and propaganda.
This puts the onus on individuals to be more discerning about the source of the information they consume, a need that is often overlooked in highly emotional, partisan times, experts said.
“It becomes incumbent on social media users to essentially do their own investigative reporting, in that they have to crosscheck and fact-check because of the nature of the algorithm,” said Lisa Kaplan, who runs a start-up called Alethea Group, which helps fight disinformation.
There are basic things users can do, Ms. Kaplan said. They must look at the source, the author and the date of anything on social media, and be aware that websites often use algorithms to predict what users want and show it to them.
But taking those precautions, the experts added, presumes that users want a factual, truthful account of events, as opposed to a version that merely reinforces their beliefs.