Corrections: Jan. 25, 2020
An article on Friday about an invitation extended to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to visit the White House misstated President Trump’s itinerary when he spoke to reporters aboard Air Force One. He was en route from Joint Base Andrews to Doral, Fla., to speak at the Republican National Committee’s winter meeting, not on his way back from the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
Because of an editing error, a picture caption with an article on Thursday about the closing of a beloved shop in Paris misstated the store’s name. As the article (and a sign in the image) correctly noted, the shop is Au Marché du Marais, not Au Marché du Paris.
An article on Tuesday about testimony at Guantánamo Bay regarding the C.I.A.’s use of torture misstated the scheduled start date for the trial of the accused plotters of the Sept. 11 attacks. It is Jan. 11, 2021, not Jan. 22.
An article on Friday about the conditions that led to Fairway’s bankruptcy filing described imprecisely the relationship between Village Super Market and ShopRite. Village Super Market operates some ShopRite locations, not all. It also misstated which company could end up buying fewer Fairway locations. It is Village Super Market, not ShopRite. The article also misstated the locations of Fairway’s Manhattan stores. The locations include its first store on Broadway on the Upper West Side, and also those in Chelsea, Harlem, Kips Bay and the Upper East Side. There is not a second location on the Upper West Side.
An article on Jan. 17 about a Grolier Club exhibition that explores the history of working women misstated the date of an artwork by Martha Maxwell. The stereograph “Mrs. Maxwell and Her Pets” was from around 1879, not 1876. The article also misidentified one of the animals seen in a stereographic image of Mrs. Maxwell. It is a pronghorn, not a deer.
This weekend’s cover story about Nigerian art stolen by British troops in the 19th century misstates the date on which James Phillips, a British official, set out on a journey to visit the ruler of Benin. It was Jan. 2, 1897, not New Year’s Day of that year.
An article on Page 16 about “Before Sunrise” misstates the film’s box office take. It made about $5.9 million domestically, not worldwide. It took in an additional $17.2 million internationally.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.