I Went to Check on a Resort in Ruins. I Left With Much More.
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
The Times’s travel section abounds with pages filled with leisurely inspiration for your future itineraries. But when my editor asked if I’d like to report from St. John in the United States Virgin Islands, she had a different story in mind: focusing on a place no one could actually visit.
Caneel Bay Resort, an eco-lodge nestled within the Virgin Islands National Park, has been shuttered since 2017, after back-to-back Category Five hurricanes battered the Caribbean island.
Since then, the owner, CBI Acquisitions, has refused to rebuild without an extension to its agreement with the National Park Service, running through 2023, that allows the company to use the federally owned land with few restrictions.
Part of the dispute involves longstanding environmental concerns that neither the park nor the company ever publicized. Those unpublished reports indicate high levels of mercury and arsenic on the property. The issue, which so far has stayed out of court, remains unresolved.
Reporting this story extended well beyond the scope of one trip in July. I spent the next six months filing public records requests and engaging in extended back-and-forth with the resort owners and several government agencies. I combed through private correspondences between the owners and the Interior Department and parsed public hearing testimony, noting issues between the resort owners and employees predating the storms.
On island, I needed to speak to people who knew about the resort and to find a way to get a look at the property. I had three days.
Within hours of landing in the United States Virgin Islands, I was already behind. As I rolled my suitcase up to the ferry station, I watched my boat start toward St. John. So I plopped on a stool at the station at Captain Quinn’s Rum Bar, and Patrick, the bartender, handed me a menu.
“You want a Painkiller,” he said, naming a local Cruzan rum-based cocktail. It wasn’t a question.
He introduced me to the man a stool over, who, when we finally boarded, described the island’s vivid history that included one of the Western Hemisphere’s first slave rebellions. Once on St. John, a boat captain helped me explore the moldering resort’s sediment-strewn sands and roof-blown cabins undisturbed.
And I found no shortage of people — I interviewed almost 40 before the end of the trip — who knew about the resort, talking to everyone including a struggling cabdriver and a former senator. After I got caught in a heat-cooling downpour between interviews, I took people up on their offers to drive me all over the island — and stayed an extra two days.
I learned about the island’s complicated history with the resort: Generations of residents have worked there. But like much of the real estate that was donated to the Park Service by Laurance Spelman Rockefeller, the grandson of the famous industrialist John D. Rockefeller, the land was acquired by purchasing locals’ property at undervalued prices.
As the dispute lingers, St. John waits, and the economy there, heavily reliant on tourism, continues to struggle — Caneel Bay Resort was St. John’s largest employer. Many residents, whose families’ histories on the island trace back hundreds of years, have since packed up.
If I were to write a second travel story about St. John, I wouldn’t name any resorts, and I wouldn’t suggest any umbrella drinks on sugar-sand beaches. I’d send you with a list of 40 names and their contact information (with permission, of course). Start off by climbing to a local lookout to see the cliff where in 1733 dozens of former slaves jumped to their deaths to avoid recapture, setting in motion rebellions across the Caribbean. Get caught in a summer storm with rains so hard you take that stranger up on a ride. Be sure to share a dinner at De’ Coal Pot on Cruz Bay; order the red snapper Creole.
And before you start out, when you’re at the ferry station on nearby St. Thomas, take a stool at Captain Quinn’s Rum Bar. And say hi to Patrick for me.