Travis Scott’s JackBoys Hit No. 1 Before New Bundling Rule Begins
Will Travis Scott be the last big beneficiary of the merchandise bundle deals that have become rampant on the Billboard charts?
Probably not. But Scott — a veteran rapper and onetime member of the Kardashian circle — did manage to reach No. 1 with his latest project just as Billboard has tightened its rules over how artists can gain a chart advantage from selling items like T-shirts and, in Scott’s case, $20 mirror dice.
“JackBoys,” a compilation album featuring Scott and artists signed to his label, including Sheck Wes, Don Toliver and Luxury Tax, opened with the equivalent of 154,000 sales in the United States, according to Nielsen. That number includes a healthy 97 million streams.
But Scott owes his chart-topping position to the 79,000 copies of “JackBoys” that his fans were credited with buying. The vast majority were delivered as part of sales bundles by Scott, one of music’s most aggressive and successful merchandise strategists. His website listed dozens of items that came with a digital copy of “JackBoys,” like hoodies and duffel bags. (One item that apparently did not contribute to its chart position was Scott’s edition of Reese’s Puffs breakfast cereal.)
It may be harder now to game the charts with swag, however, after a furor in the industry led Billboard to tweak its rules. For such sales to count on the chart, an artist must offer items in at least two versions — with music and without it. T-shirts, posters or condoms that come with music must cost at least $3.49 more than those that don’t. The new rules went into effect on Friday.
The rapper Roddy Ricch is No. 2 on this week’s chart with “Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial,” which had 100 million streams — slightly more than “JackBoys” — but just 1,000 copies sold as full albums. (Not for lack of trying: Ricch, too, is selling collectible dice that come with his record.) Harry Styles’s “Fine Line,” the top album for the last two weeks, fell to No. 4. Post Malone’s “Hollywood’s Bleeding” is No. 3, and the “Frozen 2” soundtrack is in fifth place.
In the surest sign that the holiday season is now over, the Christmas LPs that dotted last week’s Top 10 have plunged down the charts. Mariah Carey’s “Merry Christmas” landed at No. 156 with a 92 percent drop in sales, while Nat King Cole’s “Christmas Song” fell to No. 192.