It’s Over: Trump’s Acquittal by the Senate
To the Editor:
Re “Trump Acquitted” (nytimes.com, Feb. 5):
The Senate can no longer fairly be called the “world’s greatest deliberative body.” Last week the Senate’s Republican majority abandoned even a pretense of having a fair and open impeachment trial by voting down a proposal to call for witnesses or even allowing new documentary evidence to be introduced.
Now, after faux deliberations, the Republicans have concluded the proceeding with a vote to acquit President Trump (except for a solitary beacon of decency, Mitt Romney). This was the antithesis of deliberation; it was a sham trial and a swift follow-through to a foregone conclusion seemingly reached before the trial even began.
Make no mistake, this acquittal will be seen by many of our citizens not as a legitimate exoneration of the president, but rather as a blatant cover-up. Of course, President Trump and Republican Party leaders will continue to deny that he committed unconstitutional acts. But, in the end, the truth usually prevails and lying always has consequences.
The result, however unexpected it may seem at this moment, may be that in November a “blue wave” will wash away the Republican majority in the Senate, and we will find that the Democrats have been swept back into the White House.
Ken Derow
Swarthmore, Pa.
To the Editor:
Re “Why I’m Voting to Acquit President Trump,” by Rob Portman (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Feb. 5):
Senator Portman, you and your party have made three arguments. First, that soliciting foreign interference in an American election does not “rise to the level” of an impeachable offense. I’m sure you’re aware that many constitutional scholars say that this is exactly what the framers worried about. I suspect you’d see it differently if a Democratic president did exactly the same thing. By ignoring this blatant attempt at manipulating an American election, you’re opening a floodgate that will not easily be closed.
Second, you argue that the Democratic investigation was slapdash. If you were sincere you could have made it less so by voting to call witnesses. Moreover, Republicans also argue that this impeachment is too close to an election. You can’t have it both ways — every additional day that Democrats spend investigating is an additional day closer to the election.
Finally, you argue that the Senate should be addressing America’s problems. You will have ample opportunity to show that you are sincere by urging your Republican colleagues to take up some of the many bills that the House of Representatives has passed. As a voter in your state, I hope you do this, but I will also be surprised.
Keith Warren
Bexley, Ohio
To the Editor:
Re “Collins Will Not Support Removal of the President” (news article, Feb. 5):
Senator Susan Collins said President Trump has learned a great deal from impeachment. She is absolutely right. He has learned that his fundamental working assumption — that he can get away with anything — is correct.
He has learned that the Republicans will sacrifice the norms of liberal democracy to get re-elected. He has learned to use the White House and his presidential powers to enforce protection racket politics at home and abroad. And he has learned that the Democratic Party doesn’t have a clue how to stop him.
If he were my student, I’d give Trump an A+ in political learning.
Dan Brumberg
Washington
The writer is director of the masters program in democracy and governance at Georgetown University.
To the Editor:
Now that the Senate has acquitted a president on plausible charges of abusing his power — declining even to hear from witnesses — I think we must regretfully declare the American experiment with democracy over.
We had a good run and can rightfully be proud of our rise from colonial backwater to world power. But it is now time to return to a more established form of governance with a far longer track record.
As it happens, we have a rare opportunity to reverse the decision made in 1776 by installing a member of the British royal family who happens to be out of a job and is currently house-hunting on this side of the Atlantic. He even has an American wife. Clearly the stars are aligning.
Long live King Harry of America and his gracious Queen Meghan!
Nils Kongshaug
Brooklyn