Nazi Sympathizer Pleads Guilty to Threatening to Kill Hispanic People
A Maryland man who idolized Hitler and claimed that President Trump would start a “racial war” pleaded guilty on Tuesday to threatening to kill Hispanic people, including a South Florida woman he barraged with hateful Facebook messages.
The man, Eric Lin, 35, of Clarksburg, Md., pleaded guilty in United States District Court in South Florida to a felony charging him with knowingly and intentionally transmitting a threatening communication in interstate commerce, federal prosecutors said.
Mr. Lin, who is scheduled to be sentenced on March 30, faces up to five years in prison. His lawyer, Christian Dunham, declined to comment on Wednesday.
Mr. Lin was charged last year with inundating a South Florida woman with gruesome Facebook messages, in which he threatened to slaughter her, her family members and other Hispanic people. The messages, which were sent from May 30, 2019, to Aug. 14, 2019, also contained expressions of support for Hitler and Mr. Trump.
“I will stop at Nothing until you, your family, your friends, your entire WORTHLESS LATIN RACE IS RACIALLY EXTERMINATED!” Mr. Lin wrote to the woman on Facebook in June, according to a criminal complaint.
In another message, Mr. Lin wrote to the woman, who was from Spain, that he was acting under the authority of Hitler and God to “DECLARE SPANISH AND ALL SPANISH SPEAKING PEOPLE ILLEGAL.”
In July, he wrote, “I thank God everyday President Donald John Trump is President and that he will launch a Racial War and Crusade.”
Eventually, Mr. Lin began to discuss kidnapping the woman and injuring her co-worker.
He asked an associate to trick her into renting a house, where she would be ambushed, according to the criminal complaint. Mr. Lin said he would pay the associate $25,000 after he drove the chained woman to Seattle, where Mr. Lin was arrested in August. Because she is Hispanic and hates whites, Mr. Lin asserted, “I doubt the F.B.I. would care much about her.”
The messages Mr. Lin sent to the woman came from two Facebook accounts opened under assumed names. But the woman told the F.B.I. she believed that they had, in fact, come from Mr. Lin because he often discussed mass shootings and his admiration for Hitler during his frequent visits to the restaurant where she worked in Key Biscayne, Fla.
After his arrest, Mr. Lin waived his Miranda rights and acknowledged in a video-recorded statement that the two Facebook accounts were his and that he had used them to send the threatening messages to the woman, according to a court document filed this week and signed by Mr. Lin.
The woman told the F.B.I. that Mr. Lin's threats — which stretched across more than 150 printed pages — made her fear for her life.
Mr. Lin's arrest is another example of what federal authorities have described as the serious danger posed by racially motivated threats and possible attacks by domestic extremists.
“We believe domestic terrorists pose a present and persistent threat of violence and economic harm to the United States,” Michael C. McGarrity, the assistant director of the F.B.I.’s counterterrorism division, told lawmakers last year. “In fact, there have been more arrests and deaths caused by domestic terrorists than international terrorists in recent years.”
Mr. McGarrity added that the bureau was most concerned about lone offenders using firearms. Such individuals, he said, often act without a clear group affiliation or guidance, making them challenging to identify, investigate and disrupt.