How to Watch the Golden Globes on Sunday
The 77th annual Golden Globes will be handed out Sunday at the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills. With Ricky Gervais returning for a fifth time as the host and the awards’ general reputation for being unpredictable, it should be an interesting night. Here’s how to watch the show and other details to get up to speed:
What time do the festivities start? Celebrities start walking the red carpet in the afternoon, The ceremony begins at 8 p.m. Eastern time, 5 p.m. Pacific.
Where can you watch the red carpet? Many outlets will offer video and photos, including The New York Times. On television, a sure bet is E!, which will begin broadcasting at 4 p.m. Eastern, 1 p.m. Pacific.
Online, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, which sponsors the awards, has made a deal to livestream fashion coverage on Facebook Watch, starting at 6 p.m. Eastern time, 3 p.m. Pacific.
Where can you watch the ceremony? On television, NBC is the Hollywood Foreign Press’s designated broadcaster. The network's preshow starts at 7 p.m.
Online, if you have a cable login, you can watch via NBC.com/live. Depending on where you live, there’s also Hulu + Live TV, Sling TV, AT&T TV Now, YouTube TV or FuboTV, which all require subscriptions.
Just what are the Globes anyway? 25 film and television awards presented by the Hollywood Foreign Press, a group of about 90 journalists mainly known for this ceremony. There’s no overlap with Academy Awards voters, but because of the timing (Oscar nominations this year fall on Jan. 13), the Globes can seem like they’re influential.
Who or what should you watch for? Netflix made an especially big splash this year, leading the nominations tally, partly thanks to “Marriage Story” and “The Irishman.” Tom Hanks will be given the Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement, and Ellen DeGeneres will get the Carol Burnett Award for contributions to television.
Who do we think will win? Glad you asked! Check out our awards expert Kyle Buchanan’s predictions here.