Revisiting American Short Stories Selected by John Updike
This week, Annalisa Quinn reviews John L’Heureux’s story collection “The Heart Is a Full-Wild Beast.” In 1984, L’Heureux wrote for the Book Review about “The Best American Short Stories 1984,” selected by John Updike.
He casts a quick glance at the short stories of 50 years ago: They reflect “a harsh world, but not a hopeless or narrow one.” He charts the decline of interest in the story form: “The magazines that pay significant amounts for short fiction cannot presently be more than a dozen,” and of these only four allow artistic experimentation. And he summarizes the themes of this collection: “Euthanasia and gerontology figure in the ’80s short story as distinctively as live-in lovers, Little League, shopping malls, television, and rickety extended families of stepparents and stepsiblings.” So he gives us a context in which to read and enjoy the stories.
If a number of the authors’ names are unfamiliar, “The Best American Short Stories 1984” should remedy that. Rick DeMarinis writes a funny, touching story, “Gent,” about a mother who is, as Mr. Updike notes, “a hot number.” Mary Hood explores the life and dying of a woman out of her time, too late for the women’s movement and unstrung by its possibilities; this deft and wise story is aptly and ironically called “Inexorable Progress.” Madison Smartt Bell, Lee K. Abbott and Lowry Pei surprise us with fresh voices and quirky visions.
In his introduction, Mr. Updike tells us what he looks for: “I want stories to startle and engage me within the first few sentences, and in their middle to widen or deepen or sharpen my knowledge of human activity, and to end by giving me a sensation of completed statement.”
Some will argue the “best” has no meaning in such a collection. Some will want more diversity in styles, structures, the basic assault on the problem of storytelling. Some will simply hate the idea of “best.” But everyone will find some story that casts a sudden shadow, catches the breath and holds it, troubles the mind and then the spirit and then will not go away.
Read the rest of the review.