Carlos Ghosn, at Home but Waiting for the Next Move
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Five days after his triumphant homecoming to Beirut, Carlos Ghosn is all but invisible.
A crowd of journalists from around the world lines up in the chilly rain on the sidewalk opposite his pink villa in Beirut each day, only to be disappointed. He is unlikely to be inside, and only a couple of people have gone in and out. Even close friends say they have not seen him.
[Latest updates on Mr. Ghosn’s press conference in Beirut.]
A photo has circulated showing Mr. Ghosn celebrating New Year’s Eve at what a friend said was a dinner for eight people, including his wife and some of his wife’s friends. But in a country about the size of Connecticut, no word has leaked of where exactly Mr. Ghosn is staying while he prepares for — well — nobody really knows.
It is unclear if Mr. Ghosn is safe from prosecution in Japan, which he fled on Sunday while charged with financial crimes from his days as chairman of the Nissan-Renault automaking alliance. Although there is no extradition treaty between the two nations, will Japan demand that Lebanon hand him over? Failing that, will it try to bring charges against him through the Lebanese courts, as some Lebanese officials have proposed?
In fleeing to Lebanon, where he grew up and enjoys broad popularity, Mr. Ghosn has traded a legal system that gives prosecutors broad legal powers for one known for its corruption.
Not that Lebanese officials necessarily see it that way: Mr. Ghosn’s supporters here believe he had little chance of a fair trial in Japan, with its 99 percent conviction rate.
But after twice pressing Japanese officials for Mr. Ghosn’s return while he was in custody and then out on bail, the Lebanese government has largely gone quiet, waiting, it seems, to see what Japan will do. Top politicians have refrained from commenting about Mr. Ghosn’s presence in the country, other than to deny a report that President Michel Aoun met with him the day he returned.
The caretaker justice minister, Albert Serhan, said this week that the Lebanese authorities had not immediately acted on an Interpol “red notice” for Mr. Ghosn — essentially a request seeking help apprehending a fugitive — because it had been sent directly to Beirut from Tokyo, rather than from Interpol’s central office, as he said was required.
“We have a procedural problem,” Mr. Serhan said, adding that officials needed to research whether the red notice compelled Lebanon to summon, question or detain Mr. Ghosn.
“All charges against Ghosn should be studied, case by case, step by step, and measures will be taken upon the new developments,” he said.
The situation is awkward for Lebanon. Japan supplies it with millions of dollars in aid each year, pledging at least $18 million in 2017 to help the government absorb its Syrian refugee population, though other countries give far more. Japan also has a voting seat on the board of the International Monetary Fund, which Lebanon can ill afford to alienate while it slogs through a financial crisis.
“They don’t want to offend Japan altogether,” said Nasser Yassin, a public policy professor at the American University of Beirut. “They can’t just say, ‘We’re not looking into this.’”
On the other hand, he added, the government is unlikely to move quickly, perhaps because it is unsure how to proceed — and perhaps because Mr. Ghosn has powerful friends.
“I’m sure he’s getting some assurances from someone in Lebanon,” Mr. Yassin said.
Lebanese officials have said Mr. Ghosn entered legally with a French passport, so there was no reason to stop him at the border. The problem is Japan’s, they said.
“The security breach was there, on their side, not here,” said Alain Aoun, a member of Parliament and a nephew of the president. “The guy just showed up. The Japanese should be furious at themselves.”
The conviction among some Lebanese that Mr. Ghosn enjoys mysterious protections at the top has played into a larger sense of injustice fueling Lebanon’s 11-week-old antigovernment protests, which have targeted Lebanon’s corrupt, cozy political elite. There is one standard for the rich and well connected, protesters say, and another for everyone else.

His friends and supporters, on the other hand, are calling for Mr. Ghosn to be afforded the hero’s welcome he might have been expecting from a country where his face was once on a postage stamp.
“I just want the Lebanese government to be more understanding and give more support,” said Roger Mouracade, a childhood friend in Lebanon, who said he had not yet seen Mr. Ghosn.
Another explanation for the Lebanese government’s inaction may be that it is simply distracted by protests and impending economic collapse.
“He arrived in Lebanon amid all these problems,” said Neemat Frem, a member of Parliament who said he was open to having Mr. Ghosn tried here. “Everybody’s busy.”
Mr. Ghosn has promised to talk to the media and defend himself publicly next week.
“You’ll see — he will not be cornered. He has an answer to everything,” said Ricardo Karam, a Lebanese television host who has interviewed Mr. Ghosn several times and considers him a friend. “When you know accusations are not true, and you’ve done right, you fear nothing.”
Mr. Karam said Mr. Ghosn had spent his first night back in Beirut at his mother-in-law’s house, but was not sure where Mr. Ghosn was staying now. He, like others, expected him to return at some point to the pink villa with pale-blue shutters in Beirut’s most upscale neighborhood, which Mr. Ghosn and his family used while in Beirut up until his legal troubles began.
Though the mansion had been bought and renovated for Mr. Ghosn, at a total cost of about $14 million, by a Nissan subsidiary, he and his wife, Carole, saw the house as rightfully theirs because they believed it was part of his future retirement package, Mr. Karam said. Nissan locked Mrs. Ghosn out of the house late last year as it broke ties with Mr. Ghosn, but she was back in the house about two weeks later, Mr. Karam said.
“Poor lady. Poor lady. Poor lady,” Mr. Karam said. “She was treated like a terrorist. It was an uncertain future. Nobody knew what was going to happen.”
On Monday, when news spread that Mr. Ghosn had returned, Mr. Karam messaged Mrs. Ghosn. “Happy New Year! To a new beginning,” he wrote.
Her reply was an emoji: “Big smile,” Mr. Karam said. “Big tear.”