Forget ‘Affiliative Bonds.’ Animals Have Friends Just Like We Do.
FRIENDSHIP
The Evolution, Biology, and Extraordinary Power of Life’s Fundamental Bond
By Lydia Denworth
In the journal Behaviour in 2002, a primatologist threw down a loaded question: Do monkeys and apes have friends? Not friends with a protective cloak of italics, or “friends” with judgmental quote marks. Not “close affiliative bonds,” “special relationships” or “peculiar-proximate relations.” Just: friends.
It was a relatively outré concept at the time, and the article’s author, the anthropologist Joan Silk, made the most of her provocation with a cheeky title: “Using the ‘F’-word in Primatology.” As Silk observed, her field’s focus on “the negative aspects of animal behavior, such as competition, conflict, manipulation, coercion and deception,” made knowledge about friendship in nature “still quite limited.” Yet, she argued, data were starting to show an adaptive value to having close social bonds. And scientists had observed special ties between animals for years, sometimes calling them friendships. Jane Goodall wrote about “Mrs. Brown” and “Old Baggage,” two spotted hyena pals living in Tanzania. Llama, baboon, parrot, horse and grizzly bear friends had been documented by zoologists.
Nearly 20 years later, the animal behavior field has changed considerably. To speak of a cockroach’s personality or a marmot’s mood is no longer scientifically irresponsible; in fact, many behaviorists consider it imprecise and behind the times not to do so. Anthropomorphism — projecting human traits onto other animals — is of course to be avoided, but thanks to an expanded understanding of shared neurobiology, advances in comparative genomics and a better grasp of behavioral ecology, the very meaning of the word is under reconsideration. Decrying someone’s research for being anthropomorphic may have more to do with a critic’s unexamined assumptions about human exceptionalism than inaccuracy on the scholar’s part.
There’s never been a better time to explore, scientifically and philosophically, conditions formerly considered uniquely human. In “Friendship: The Evolution, Biology, and Extraordinary Power of Life’s Fundamental Bond,” Lydia Denworth seeks to “deepen our understanding” of how friendship “affects the course of a life,” by drawing on research from both the human and animal kingdom. What makes us connect with some individuals but not others? And, more metaphysically: What are friends for?
Having previously written about the biology of language and the history of lead poisoning, Denworth in this book attempts a sort of chronology of friendship from earliest infant-mother attachment to the formation of new connections in old age. She divides her inquiry into roughly two strands: how friendship works (through mechanisms like neurotransmitters and eye contact), and why friendship works (improving an individual’s evolutionary fitness, its chances of survival and reproduction).
As Denworth explains, her “usual beat is the brain,” making her an expert guide to the human neurobiology that allows us to find and keep friends. This ability, she writes, starts the moment we’re born. That’s when the social brain, a network of separate regions that work together to alert us to our place in relation to others, begins wiring itself. For the rest of your life, every time you meet or think about another person, your social brain processes how you feel and shapes how you act. All day, every day, social beings instinctively size up one another and form relationships. The social brain, Denworth reports, is at the core of human friendship: It bonds us with some people and repels us from others.
Denworth describes one bit of social neurobiology that in fact is found in our skin: special nerve fibers called CT afferents that, when stimulated, create a pleasant sensation. A clue to their possible evolutionary benefit is that the fibers “prefer a slow, stroking touch, at a pretty specific rate of one to two inches per second, just about the speed at which mothers caress their newborn babies.” A system that encourages bonding behavior by rewarding it with enjoyable sensations makes evolutionary sense, a useful reminder that neurobiology isn’t contained solely in the cranium.
However, by focusing on mother-baby relationships, Denworth misses the fact that social brains can and do develop in the absence of mammal-style parental care. In fact, the building blocks of the human social brain (including systems that shape hierarchies and moods) can be found in fish, birds, amphibians, reptiles and even crustaceans. In other words, the capacity for relationship — a creature’s ability to fine-tune its behavior in response to other members of its group — is widespread and very old. Our human experience of friendship, including the intensely pleasurable feelings of connection and the agony of rejection, stems from this ancient biology. Research suggests that even members of different species (for example, horses and their riders, and dogs and their owners) can communicate with one another because of shared features of the social brain.
Exploring friendship’s opposite — loneliness — throws the topic into poignant relief, especially when Denworth asserts that what’s striking about loneliness “is not that those who suffer from it are peculiar, but that they are so ordinary.” Almost half of Americans sometimes or always feel alone, she reports, citing a recent survey of 20,000 people. And though old age may be an isolated time of life, Denworth says the highest rates of loneliness are reported by adolescents and young adults between 18 and 22.
Her account of research suggesting an association between loneliness and autoimmune disease, and her description of a dismal state known as the “loneliness loop,” are some of the most informative — and from a public health perspective, important — passages in the book. High-quality relationships (essentially those that are supportive, not ambivalent) can ward off chronic loneliness’s worst health effects, as can diversity. People with a wider variety of social ties have stronger immune systems.
While Denworth deftly limns the “how” of friendship, she doesn’t fully deliver on the “why,” because, like the primatologists and neuroscientists she reports on, she restricts her investigation mostly to humans, monkeys and other primates. A statement like “Friendship is old — as old as life on the African savannas,” by which she means as old as human evolution, is problematic; while technically true, this overlooks the more complete evolutionary story that is hundreds of millions of years in the making. The social lives of crayfish, the partner preferences of fish, the shunning by birds of flock members that don’t conform to the group — all this and more is being investigated by scientists precisely because these animals’ neurobiology is relevant to humans and can contribute to our understanding of the origins of any number of societal challenges, from educational attainment to bullying. To bring evolution into a conversation about the biology of human behavior, it’s scientifically not only possible but necessary to look beyond primates.
Whether science ultimately shows that friendship plays only a small role in the day-to-day lives of other animals, or that it’s a driving force behind a species’ ability to survive and thrive, we’ll be closer to knowing whether and why modern humans are so special. In the meantime, perhaps we could borrow some terms from the field of animal behavior. Friendships change over time, and “temporary proximate relation” certainly defines at least someone in everyone’s past. We like some folks but not others; “preferred social partner” politely captures that feeling. “Special pair dyad” might be a good replacement for “best friends.” As for the “‘F’-word,” I say go ahead and use it, when appropriate, to describe the inner life of any animal with whom we share not just the planet but the complex social mechanisms that make surviving here more likely — and more pleasurable.