What South Dakota Doesn’t Get About Transgender Children
Early in my medical training, I read a landmark case study about a 12-year-old boy who wrote a suicide note to his mother saying he would rather die than go through puberty. I later met teenagers who tightly bound their chests — knowing that it could result in fractured ribs — because the emotional pain of seeing their breasts was much worse than any imaginable physical pain.
These children are transgender, and they account for almost 2 percent of youth in the United States. They are suffering from the psychological pain of having a body that doesn’t match their gender identity. I’ve dedicated my medical and research career to better understanding their mental health.
Over the past few decades, physicians have learned how to help these young people. In the past, doctors tried to force them to be cisgender, to identify with the sex they were assigned at birth. New research shows that this approach is associated with their attempting suicide. Having learned from these mistakes, we now follow new protocols that guide us to accept and affirm transgender youths in their transgender identities. We often use medications that prevent some of the physical changes of puberty that cause these adolescents distress.
Unfortunately, huge shifts in medical literature do not always make their way to politicians. While there is broad consensus among doctors that these affirmative medical protocols are important, legislators in several states are planning to make this medical care illegal. In South Dakota, the House recently passed a bill that would fine or even imprison pediatricians who provide gender-affirmative care to patients under 16.
The bills are about medical care, but the state representatives sponsoring them seem unfazed by the fact that all relevant major medical organizations disagree with them. The American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry released a statement condemning the bills. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the Endocrine Society have both published clear protocols advocating gender-affirming care for youth, making them likely to follow suit.
The public deserves accurate medical information about how doctors care for transgender youth, instead of alarmist commentary from pundits and politicians. One of the most important things to know is that doctors offer affirmation in different ways at different stages of development.
For prepubescent children, the only intervention would be a “social transition.” This may involve allowing the child to take on the name, pronoun, style of dress and so on that matches their gender identity. Mostly, it means not placing limits on children around how they express their gender and not promoting shame around gender “atypical” behaviors. Two studies to date have shown that transgender children who are allowed to socially transition have mental health nearly indistinguishable from that of cisgender children. This is in stark contrast to children who weren’t allowed to socially transition, who had elevated rates of anxiety and depression.
At puberty, a child may be offered what’s called a “puberty blocker.” This medication pauses puberty to buy adolescents more time to decide whether they want to later take estrogen or testosterone, medications to go through the puberty that matches their identity. Without puberty blockers, a child will go through physical changes like voice deepening or breast development that are difficult to reverse and often require surgery.
Just last month, our research team from Harvard Medical School and the Fenway Institute published a study showing that access to puberty blockers during adolescence is associated with lower odds of transgender young adults considering suicide. Despite fearmongering, these are safe medications that doctors have been using for decades for cisgender children who go through puberty too early. They also are reversible — if the medication is stopped, puberty will progress.
Deciding to start estrogen or testosterone treatment is a more serious decision. They cause cosmetic changes that are difficult to reverse, including body fat redistribution and voice changes. For this reason, medical guidelines recommend that they generally not be provided until age 16, or at the earliest, 14. Though the evidence is still emerging, all existing data suggests that access to estrogen or testosterone is associated with improved mental health for these kids.
There has been growing attention to the idea that some youth who start estrogen or testosterone will later choose to stop it. That appears to be rare. Our group from Harvard Medical School recently published a case of an adolescent who started estrogen and chose to stop. That young person told us they did not regret the trial of estrogen and that it helped them to better understand their gender identity, even though they now have some cosmetic changes to their body (mostly body fat and hair redistribution). In other cases, kids “de-transition” because their communities place so much pressure on them to be cisgender that they feel they have no choice.
While conservatives highlight that youth may later regret the physical changes from estrogen or testosterone, the doctors who take care of these patients know it is far more likely that a young transgender person will have regrets when physicians refuse to provide the medical care to pause the puberty that is actively distressing them.
The potential benefits of providing gender-affirmative care typically outweigh the minor risks associated with treatment. These medications are administered only after thoughtful conversations between patient, family and physician. Medical interventions are not started without all three being on board and understanding the risks and benefits. Legislation that puts these decisions in the hands of the government instead of families and physicians is dangerous.
Conservatives also like to use phrases like “sex change surgery” to scare the general public. Under current medical guidelines, genital surgeries for transgender patients are never offered before adulthood. The only surgeries that are sometimes considered before the patient is an adult is the removal of breast tissue. It is something that requires careful evaluation before proceeding. Furthermore, youth who need this surgery are generally those who were not able to obtain puberty blockers, subsequently developed significant breast tissue, then had strong negative emotional reactions to their chest. Easier access to puberty blockers in the first place could eliminate the need for this kind of surgery.
State legislators need to educate themselves about these young people and their medical care before introducing legislation that will hurt them. They need to reach out to physicians and professional medical societies for input. They need to talk to the researchers in this area, and most important, they need to bring in the transgender youth themselves. If their bodies are going to be legislated, they should have the opportunity to be heard by the legislators who would do this to them. The medical profession has made it clear: This kind of legislation is dangerous and should not become law.