‘The Good Place’ and ‘BoJack Horseman’ Took Us to Hell and Back
In the penultimate episode of “The Good Place,” after four seasons wandering the afterlife, our dear-departed heroes finally make it to the destination promised in the title. It is, of course, beautiful, with lush gardens and buildings with alabaster walls.
It’s also familiar. The first time I watched, I felt like I knew this place. Was I recovering a memory from another life, or a state before life? Had I — good Lord — had I been to heaven?
Turns out I had, kind of. It took a few minutes of searching my memory and Google Images to realize that the location the producers chose to represent the Good Place was … the Getty Center, the art museum in the hills overlooking Los Angeles.
It’s a fitting choice for a humanist Hollywood reboot of paradise. “The Good Place,” whose finale airs Thursday night on NBC, is a slapstick survey of moral philosophy that places its faith not in a higher power (or a lower one) but in human culture and creation.
It’s also a visual echo of another great comedy, the zoologically incorrect Hollywood satire “BoJack Horseman,” whose final eight episodes arrive on Netflix Friday. Its title sequence begins with a wide shot of the cliffside house where the title character (Will Arnett), an anthropomorphic horse and former ’90s sitcom star, has spent six seasons chugging booze, pills and the occasional chaser of remorse.
If heaven is in the L.A. hills, so is hell. And over the past several years, these two comedies have wandered the crooked path between the two, trying to figure out how to be a decent person in a fallen world.
“The Good Place” is the cheerier of the two, a mode that suits its broadcast-TV setting. But it also matches the sensibility of the show’s creator, Michael Schur, whose “Parks and Recreation” and “Brooklyn Nine-Nine” are each about oddball co-workers who bring humanity to institutions.
“The Good Place,” in a way, is a workplace comedy where the job is saving souls. It begins with Eleanor (Kristen Bell), an Arizona ne’er-do-well whose blood is 90 percent margarita mix, waking up in what she believes is heaven — but is actually an experimental hell, in which she and her new dead friends are unwittingly assigned to torture one another.
Through a series of metaphysical twists (this is a rare sitcom with the momentum and galaxy-brain surprises of a drama like “Lost”), we discover that eternity is broken: No humans have qualified for heaven in centuries, less because we’re so bad than because the point-based system is out of whack.
So Eleanor sets out to fix it, with the expertise of Chidi (William Jackson Harper), a student of moral philosophy; Tahani (Jameela Jamil), a self-absorbed socialite; and Jason (Manny Jacinto), a small-time Florida criminal and Molotov cocktail enthusiast. Each alone is a Goofus. Put together — and abetted by a renegade demon (Ted Danson) and a hypercompetent A.I. assistant (D’Arcy Carden) — they may make enough of a Gallant to fix the universe.
It’s that “together” that connects “The Good Place” to Schur’s other communitarian comedies. A lot of TV series are about what it means to be good — even “Breaking Bad” was, albeit using a negative example. What distinguishes this one is that it’s ultimately about our obligation to help other people to be good, to tutor and challenge one another, to learn and to pass lessons along.
As its trial-and-comedy-of-errors shows, you can push yourself, work the program and accrue the points, but it’s nigh impossible to do it alone. An entirely individual morality, in its vision, is a kind of solipsism doomed to fail. Making a better world — or even one better person — has to be a team effort. (One Season 4 episode had the sunny-Sartre title, “Help Is Other People.”)
“The Good Place,” charitably, blames our circumstances, not ourselves, for this situation. Modern life, it argues, has become so complicated, the effects of our actions so far-reaching and unpredictable, that it’s impossible to live a good life on the first blundering try. (One small but resonant example is Chidi’s love of almond milk, the virtuous-seeming beverage with the giant water-usage footprint.)
In “BoJack,” created by Raphael Bob-Waksberg, the flaws are in the hearts of humans (and horses, and dogs, and cats…). BoJack has spent six seasons betraying friends, victimizing women and diving into a bottle whenever his latest self-improvement kick proves too difficult.
More recently, he’s done a stint in rehab and taken a job teaching theater at Wesleyan University to turn his life around. It is not too much of a spoiler, I think, to say that this did not fix everything. In the series’s final run, BoJack is forced to confront his history of offenses and abuses in a way that sends him off the rails.
The series, down to its climax, shares interspecies DNA with the difficult-male antihero dramas of TV’s recent past (parodied in Season 5 through “Philbert,” the darker-than-noir streaming drama BoJack stars in). But it renders BoJack’s dysfunction small and sad rather than epic and tragic.
The moral universe of “BoJack” is darker and messier than its NBC counterpart. Even its aesthetic is baroque, Hieronymus Bosch-like, compared with the clean, jewel-tone fantasy of “The Good Place.”
In “BoJack,” there are no cosmic do-overs, no second or two-thousandth chances. In one of the final episodes, BoJack imagines seeing a long-dead friend, who tells him: “There is no other side. This” — i.e., mortal life — “is it.”
It’s a dark statement. But dark is not the same as hopeless. Really, “BoJack” is making a kind of moral argument from atheism. In its universe, you have to do right not because you might end up in The Bad Place but because this, right here, is the only place.
Where “BoJack” is most like “The Good Place” is that it, too, is about the moral obligation to help others to be good. But it’s complicated; the show is also aware of the blurry line between help and enabling.
Throughout the series, BoJack is bailed out and pulled from the brink by others: his friend Mr. Peanutbutter (Paul F. Tompkins), a chuckleheaded Labrador retriever; his overstressed feline agent, Princess Caroline (Amy Sedaris); and his ghostwriter-turned-confidante, Diane (Alison Brie).
But Diane — as close as anything to the show’s moral center — starts to wonder if she’s really helping BoJack improve or (à la Dr. Melfi counseling Tony Soprano) just making him a more efficient miscreant. There’s an entire showbiz industry built around performative contrition, and BoJack has mastered its turns and straightaways like Secretariat. (He walks out of one supposedly harrowing confessional interview as if he’d aced the SAT: “I felt like I could see the matrix!”)
If “The Good Place” is how we need to raise one another up, “BoJack” is often about the need not to let one another off the hook. At the end of Season 5, for instance, Diane rejects BoJack’s plea that she write an exposé on him after a #MeToo incident, realizing that she’d just be stage-managing his redemption theater.
But she’s also reluctant to cut him off entirely. As she says, toward the end of the series: “Maybe it’s everybody’s job to save each other.”
As different as “The Good Place” and “BoJack” are in tone, each in its absurdist way gets at a piece of the current moment, in which many of our public fights are as much about morality — complicity, complacency, enabling — as they are about politics. In very different ways, both shows ask: Is being good simply an individual act that you can undertake in isolation? Is it enough to tend your personal moral garden if you allow evil to flourish around you?
“BoJack” is slightly more to my taste; it’s more chaotic, more (literally) animal, less focused on the idea of meritocratic perfectibility than learning to live amid uncertainty and mess. After three terrific, ambitious seasons, the final run of “The Good Place” has felt a little too easily affirming. There’s a reason few people remember the parts of “The Divine Comedy” that aren’t about hell.
But this isn’t a competition. The series make good complements, like two testaments in a sitcom Bible. Sometimes you need a reminder that humans are still capable of making a better world together. And sometimes you need a reminder of the beast within.