‘We Had Already Missed the Stop He Mentioned, but I Said Nothing.’
Dear Diary:
In 1967, I left the convent after five years and moved from western New York to Queens.
I had taken a job with a social services agency, and on this particular day I was riding the subway from Midtown Manhattan to Brooklyn. I was going to visit a teenager who had just been released from a residential program for delinquent boys.
On the train, I studied the subway map, trying to determine my whereabouts. An older man who was sitting across from me came over and asked my destination. He proceeded to show me which stop was mine.
We chatted for a bit. I asked him where he was headed. We had already missed the stop he had mentioned, but I said nothing.
When it was time for me to get off, he came with me. Puzzled, I asked why he hadn’t gotten off earlier. He said he wanted to make sure I was O.K.
I was concerned about what he would do next. He told me that he would just go up the stairs, down the other side and then back to his destination on the next train.
I went on my way, knowing my adventures were going to be fine.
— Marge Volpe
Dear Diary:
I was in Vanderbilt Hall at Grand Central Terminal. The couple I was sharing a table with in the food pavilion warmed up to friendly conversation, sharing their recent food discoveries and favorite restaurants.
After chatting, they returned to their butternut squash soup, and I to my butter and knekkebrod.
The woman received something on her phone.
“Look,” she said to her husband, “he sent a picture.”
She turned to me.
“Our son just shaved his head bald for the first time,” she said.
Maybe it was my raised eyebrows, or the way I said, “Ohhh.” Either way, she felt the need to explain.
“He already lost most of his hair,” she said. “It’s called ‘embracing it.’”
— Paul Klenk
Dear Diary:
It was late on a Sunday night. I got on an L train at Union Square to go home to Brooklyn after seeing a play at the Public Theater.
The train was stalled at the station, so I walked to the end of the platform and took a seat in a nearly empty car. After a few minutes, a young woman got on and sat down next to me.
I glanced over and saw her staring at me with a sort of stunned look on her face.
“Is your name Cornelia?” she asked.
“It is,” I said, unnerved. I had never seen her before in my life.
She unzipped her purse and pulled out my driver’s license.
Now I was the one who was stunned.
She explained that she had found it on the ground near the subway entrance. I realized it must have fallen out of my wallet when I pulled out my MetroCard. I hadn’t even noticed.
“I looked around for a policeman, but I was afraid I would miss the train!” she said. “I had no idea how I would ever find you.”
— Cornelia Channing
Dear Diary:
I was walking through Chinatown when I saw a man I almost used to know.
He was a quiet, pleasant man who worked as a cleaner at a gym on the Lower East Side where I used to work out. He was there every day, hauling bags of dirty towels and spraying down the free weights.
I had never learned his name and he had never learned mine, but we would smile at each other when our paths crossed.
I hadn’t thought about him in years, but seeing him on the street going about his business, made me remember so much about his looks and his mannerisms then. He was grayer now, and still small but strong, like a welterweight boxer.
I stopped and gazed at him as he walked past me down the street, a ghost from my younger days.
I thought about my old life on the Lower East Side and all of the things that were happening when I was going to that gym. And I thought about all of the people who are a part of my daily life now whose names I may never learn.
— Eric Hutchinson
Dear Diary:
I frequently ride the bus in New York City, and I have overheard people say unexpected things.
“I taped my ‘60 Minutes’ interview last week,” I once heard a woman tell a companion.
“My probation officer said I could go to the concert in New Jersey,” I heard a young man say to someone he was with.
“I had a tour of the East Wing and then I went to the luncheon in the West Wing,” I heard another woman say.
“My parents live on the same block as me,” I heard a young woman say to the person next to her.
A man they didn’t know interjected.
“I’d like to correct your grammar,” he said. “You should have said, ‘My parents live on the same block as I.’”
— Sheldon Burke
Read all recent entries and our submissions guidelines. Reach us via email diary@nytimes.com or follow @NYTMetro on Twitter.