What’s on TV Friday: ‘Shrill’ and ‘October Faction’
SHRILL Stream on Hulu. Season 1 of this comedy series ended with its main character, Annie (Aidy Bryant), hurling a flower pot through a window of an internet troll’s Cadillac S.U.V. She also quit her job. And she couldn’t be happier. “I’m maybe the best I’ve ever been in my life,” she declares at the beginning of the new, second season. Adapted from Lindy West’s memoir of the same name, the series has been praised for its social commentary, and for Bryant’s performance. “She radiates the wounded hopefulness of someone who’s ready for the next chapter of her life,” Margaret Lyons wrote in her review of Season 1 for The New York Times, “and by the end of the six-episode season, she’s there.” What that next chapter contains is something the second season will have to answer.
BEFORE SUNRISE (1995) Rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. “I almost fell in love with him right there, but then Rick said cut.” That’s Julie Delpy speaking in a recent interview with The Times, talking about the experience of filming this indie romance, in which Delpy plays a French student who has a whirlwind romance in Vienna with a visiting American (Ethan Hawke). Directed by Richard Linklater, the film celebrates its 25th anniversary this month.
OCTOBER FACTION Stream on Netflix. Foul beasts and family drama coalesce in this violent fantasy series. Based on the comics by Steve Niles and Damien Worm, “October Faction” centers on a pair of married monster hunters (played by J.C. MacKenzie and Tamara Taylor) who have to keep their professional lives secret from their two teenage children (Gabriel Darku and Aurora Burghart). The first episode finds the family adjusting to a move to upstate New York. It includes humanoid villains that sprout fangs. Perhaps most frightening of all, it also includes a brief appearance by a Big Mouth Billy Bass singing plastic fish.
GHOST WORLD (2001) Rent on Amazon, iTunes and Vudu. For a very different book adaptation, see this Terry Zwigoff comedy, adapted from a graphic novel by Daniel Clowes. The film stars Thora Birch and Scarlett Johansson as Enid and Rebecca, best friends and recent high-school graduates. They’re both grungy, skeptical outcasts — but Rebecca proves a bit more willing to engage with society. As the pair begins to drift apart, Enid develops a friendship with a middle-aged record collector (Steve Buscemi), whose disdain for most of the world rival’s Enid’s own.
CYMBELINE (2015) 11:35 p.m. on FXM. Shakespeare characters wear leather jackets and ride motorcycles in this contemporary take on a late Shakespeare play, “Cymbeline.” Directed by Michael Almereyda, the movie casts Ed Harris in the title role, here reimagined as a drug kingpin (he’s just the regular kind of king in the play). The ensemble also includes Milla Jovovich, Dakota Johnson, Penn Badgley, Anton Yelchin and Ethan Hawke, who’s a long way from “Before Sunrise” here.