7 Things to Do With Your Kids in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘A BOOK OF HOURS’ at the Old Stone House, Washington Park (Jan. 12, 10 and 11:30 a.m.). In the Middle Ages, a book of hours contained illustrated prayers, reminding its readers of daily devotions. Here, it’s something quite different: an oversize picture book, reminding tiny nonreaders of daily events. Presented by Spellbound Theater, a Brooklyn company specializing in productions for toddlers and preschoolers, this interactive show features the book as both its main prop — the pages have pop-ups and moving parts — and a guide to an exploration of nursery rhymes and songs. Children, who will make a related craft before the play begins, can follow along by singing and chanting with the narrator. She portrays the Old Woman Who Lives in a Shoe, and part of the fun will be helping find her children, little puppets hidden among the pages.
347-464-8542, spellboundtheatre.com
‘THE EMPEROR’S NIGHTINGALE’ at Theater 5 at Theater Row (Jan. 11-12, 2:30 p.m.; through Jan. 26). Inspired by Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale “The Nightingale,” this theatrical revival offers far more wildlife than the bird of the title. Damon Chua’s adaptation, which Pan Asian Repertory Theater first presented last year, introduces gossiping panda bears and a tiger whose front and hind halves talk to each other. An often broadly comic interpretation of Andersen’s rather serious story, the show focuses on two 18th-century Chinese princes, teenage half brothers whose father, the emperor, challenges them to prove who is his more worthy successor. Expect some lion dancing and royal rapping along the way.
212-239-6200, panasianrep.org
JUST KIDDING: ‘JUNGLE BOOK’ at Symphony Space (Jan. 11, 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.). Many young people have encountered Mowgli, Rudyard Kipling’s boy hero of the wild, in one guise or another, but probably not in the form he takes in this stage production: that of a 25-year-old architect in contemporary New York. He doesn’t dwell in that world for long, however. After receiving a birthday text message that reminds him of his childhood, Mowgli consults his old journal — a personal “jungle book” — and returns to the adventures he had long ago with animals like Baloo, the bear; Bagheera, the panther; and the nurturing wolves. Written and directed by Craig Francis and Rick Miller and recommended for children 5 and older, this adaptation uses elaborate puppetry, shadow play, masks, video projections and immersive sound and music to recreate the Indian landscape and its residents. The hourlong play, which is presented by Kidoons and WYRD Productions, also explores the nature of identity and the threat of bullying, as Mowgli confronts not only the rapacious tiger, Shere Khan, but also a menacing human hunter.
212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org
MAYERS CONSULTING ALL-AGES MUSIC SHOWCASE at Drom (Jan. 12, noon-4 p.m.). Parents often try to persuade their children to sample new foods by taking “just a taste.” The approach is similar here, but the small helpings will all be entertainment. Presented by Mayers Consulting, an artist-management company, this program will consist of 20-minute sets by eight acts that have convened as part of the Association of Performing Arts Professionals’ annual conference. While these bands and soloists strut their stuff for producers and presenters, they put on a show for your family, too. The eclectic menu includes Lucy Kalantari and the Jazz Cats, winners of the 2018 Grammy Award for best children’s album; the estimable Gustafer Yellowgold, a friendly cartoon space alien whose creator, Morgan Taylor, will appear with a full band; the Pop Ups, a duo combining pop, puppetry and science; and Billy Kelly, who infuses his wry stand-up comedy with song.
212-777-1157, mayersconsulting.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
MEET THE MUSIC!: ‘LEAVE IT TO LUDWIG’ at Alice Tully Hall (Jan. 12, 2 p.m.). That Ludwig, of course, is Beethoven, who is being celebrated everywhere this year in advance of the 250th anniversary of his birth (December 2020). And Bruce Adolphe, who wears many hats — and occasionally wigs — as director of family programs at the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, will portray the composer at this program on Sunday. (Tickets are limited.) Part of the society’s Meet the Music! series for children 6 and older, the hourlong presentation, which will be preceded by an instrument “petting zoo” at 1 p.m. in the lobby, will explore the relationship between Beethoven’s work and the emotions of everyday life. Featuring the Escher String Quartet, the concert will also include a scene in which Beethoven teaches a young pianist — Benjamin T. Rossen — just how to approach this music.
212-875-5788, chambermusicsociety.org
VILLAGE TO VILLAGE CUPCAKE AND COOKIE CRAWL (Jan. 11, 3-5:30 p.m.; continues on most Fridays and Saturdays year round). The Sugar Plum Fairy may have left most New York stages, but thanks to many alluring bake shops, the city itself remains a land of the sweets. Presented by the appropriately named Sugartooth Tours, this walk takes participants from the east side of Greenwich Village (the meeting place will be confirmed after ticket purchase) to the west, visiting small purveyors of delicious desserts. Popular with families — and offering opportunities to sit down along the way — the culinary adventure comprises six tastings, allowing those taking part to choose their own flavors from what is offered. (Children will especially enjoy the opportunity to decorate an individual mini cupcake at the tour’s end.) The crawl addresses what may be an unanswerable question: Which is better, cupcakes or cookies?
917-856-6761, sugartoothtours.com
‘WEATHERING WITH YOU’ in select theaters nationwide (Jan. 15-16, 7 and 8 p.m.). The English title of this new animated work by the acclaimed Japanese director Makoto Shinkai has multiple meanings. To be released across the United States by GKids on Jan. 17, the movie features a girl, Hina, who possesses a mystical power that would make her valuable in many places: She can make rain cease. The protagonist, Hodaka, a runaway teenage boy, meets her after arriving in a gloomy and storm-filled Tokyo. Presented by Fathom Events, these preview screenings of their adventures will be accompanied by a video interview with the director. Japan’s Academy Award submission for best international film, “Weathering With You” will be shown in an English-dubbed version at 7 p.m., and in Japanese with English subtitles at 8 p.m.
fathomevents.com