Former Franklin College President Charged With Sex Crimes Involving a Child
The former president of Franklin College, a liberal arts school in Indiana, has been charged with sex crimes involving a child after an undercover police officer posing as a teenager exchanged online messages with him on Grindr, according to a criminal complaint.
The complaint was made public on Wednesday after the college announced on Monday that it had fired the president, Thomas J. Minar, after finding out that he had been arrested in Wisconsin on suspicion of sex crimes involving a child.
“Over the weekend, Franklin College terminated the employment of President Thomas J. Minar when we became aware of a deeply disturbing incident,” the statement said.
It said the Sturgeon Bay Police Department told the college by email that Mr. Minar was taken into custody this month in Sturgeon Bay, Wis., on suspicion of child sex crimes. The statement said that Mr. Minar had confirmed to college officials that he had been arrested after they found out.
The criminal complaint, filed in Circuit Court in Door County, Wis., said Mr. Minar was charged with child enticement, use of a computer to facilitate a child sex crime and exposing a child to harmful material.
It said Mr. Minar, 56, sent messages on the dating service Grindr to an undercover officer from the Sturgeon Bay Police Department, believing him to be a teenager. The messages included photographs of a man’s groin, discussions of sex and plans to meet on Jan. 6 at a McDonald’s, where he was arrested, the complaint said.
Mr. Minar told investigators after his arrest that the purpose was “fantasy chat” and that he would have drawn a line between a chat and having sexual contact with a 15-year-old, the complaint said.
On Tuesday, Mr. Minar’s lawyer, Brett Reetz, said that Mr. Minar had been in Sturgeon Bay taking care of his mother and that he had established an online relationship on Grindr with a person who said he was 19 years old.
After the online discussions became sexual, Mr. Reetz said, the person with whom Mr. Minar had been communicating said that he was really 15, and Mr. Minar’s attitude about the relationship changed. The two agreed to meet for the first time on Jan. 6 at the McDonald’s, he said.
“There was no intent to have sexual relations,” Mr. Reetz said. “There was a concern on Thomas’s part of the difficulties of coming out.”
Colleen Nordin, the Door County district attorney in Sturgeon Bay, said in an email on Tuesday that the court determined during a bond hearing on Jan. 7 that there was “probable cause” to give it jurisdiction.
“There is no question he is deeply humiliated and ashamed of the accusations,” Mr. Reetz said, adding that Mr. Minar had been preparing to resign after the arrest, because he was “aware of what the implications were going to be for Franklin College.”
The college said Mr. Minar had been released on bond, subject to no direct contact with minors without supervision and no use of social media.
Mr. Minar did not reply to telephone messages on Tuesday.
He had been previously scheduled to step down as president of Franklin — a small, private liberal arts college about 20 miles from downtown Indianapolis —  effective June 30 of this year, the college said in its statement on Monday. “The Franklin College board of trustees is stunned by this event,” the statement said.
The college has started an investigation of his conduct as president, a post he held since July 2015.
It said in a statement on Tuesday that it had appointed Kerry Prather, the director of athletics and head men’s basketball coach, as the acting president as it searched for a replacement.