The Real Risks of Republicans’ Burying Their Heads in the Sand
Just as President Trump’s impeachment trial is getting underway, the Senate is facing a highly charged, unusual situation. New, directly relevant information and evidence is spilling across the internet and the airwaves. Documents and statements from Lev Parnas, the indicted associate of Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer and fixer Rudy Giuliani, implicate the president directly in efforts to obtain dirt on and investigations of the Bidens.
Yesterday, the Government Accountability Office issued a legal decision finding that the White House’s Office of Management and Budget violated the Impoundment Control Act when it withheld from obligation the portion of Ukraine assistance funds appropriated to the Department of Defense.
This follows a previous New York Times report that detailed the haggling by executive branch officials over the legal consequences of the president’s decision to hold back $391 million worth of military assistance for the Ukrainian military. It makes clear that the decision to withhold the aid came from the president himself.
Established by statute in 1921, the G.A.O. is an independent, nonpartisan agency that helps Congress monitor executive branch agencies’ programs and spending. The Impoundment Control Act of 1974 was written to ensure that the practice of reserving funds did not become a way for reckless presidents (like Richard Nixon) to further their own policies and priorities at the expense of Congress’s.
The G.A.O. decision goes to the heart of both the impeachment inquiry and our constitutional system of separated powers — and puts congressional Republicans in the hot seat. A violation of the Impoundment Control Act in connection with the Ukraine funds is directly relevant to the first article of impeachment because it is a mechanism by which the president executed the alleged abuse of power. The question of access to information about that violation is directly relevant to the second article of impeachment — obstruction of Congress. What is at stake is the status of Congress as a coequal branch of government. Much as Senate Republicans seem eager to, they — indeed, the entire Senate — cannot turn away from testimony and documents relevant to the articles of impeachment, however inconvenient the timing.
The G.A.O. decision addresses a rather narrow appropriations law issue. In short, what the president did here was precisely the type of adventurism the Impoundment Control Act was designed to prevent. The O.M.B. had no authority to withhold the funds because the act permits it only under specific circumstances — and in this instance, those weren’t met. The O.M.B. argued that the funds were withheld because doing so was necessary to ensure that they were not spent “in a manner that could conflict with the president’s foreign policy.” But the G.A.O. decided the withholding was an “impermissible policy deferral.”
The decision also renders a judgment that the withholding was not a mere delay, as the O.M.B. argued. Program execution was “well underway” when the O.M.B. held back the funds, and “there was no external factor causing an unavoidable delay.”
More broadly, the G.A.O. decision represents an assertion of Congress’s constitutional power of the purse. The G.A.O. is well respected, and historically the executive branch has given substantial deference to its opinions. In any other administration, this decision would have been an earthquake reverberating across the executive branch.
In this administration, the import of the decision is unclear. A Nov. 5, 2019, memorandum instructed federal agencies that they are under no obligation to comply with the legal decisions issued by the G.A.O. because those decisions are part of the legislative branch and are therefore not binding on the executive branch. As a technical matter, that is true, but the president must faithfully execute the laws, including the Impoundment Control Act. Instead, executive branch machinations in the Times report indicate that O.M.B. lawyers were working up an argument that Mr. Trump’s role as commander in chief would allow him to override Congress. Such thinking is consistent with Mr. Trump’s unprecedented stonewall approach to Congress more generally — like his assertion that he has “an Article Two where I have the right to do whatever I want as president,” his lawyers’ direction of total noncooperation with Congress’s investigation into the Ukraine matter and his refusal to participate at all in the House impeachment proceedings.
These positions are so absolutist as to be a danger to the country, and Congress needs to respond forcefully.
On the spending power, there is substantial overlap among the branches: Congress has the power of the purse, and the president is responsible for running agencies and implementing programs. Rather than adhering to a strict separation of powers, in disagreements, the branches have traditionally engaged in a back-and-forth competition. As the G.A.O. points out in its decision, faithful execution of the law does not permit the president to substitute his own policy priorities for those that Congress has enacted into law. Some amount of cooperation — in addition to competition — is needed to make the system work.
The real question going forward is whether Congress will act to protect its constitutional role. Reactions so far are not particularly encouraging. On Thursday, Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin, dismissed the decision as a mere legalistic dispute between agencies.
The G.A.O. decision suggests a further deterioration of the separation of powers. The decision applies only to funds that were appropriated to the Defense Department and not the State Department, because the O.M.B. and the State Department “have failed, as of yet, to provide the information we need to fulfill our duties” under the Impoundment Control Act regarding State Department funds. In what was, for a nonpartisan agency like the G.A.O., a blistering conclusion, it states that its role “is essential to ensuring respect for and allegiance to Congress’ constitutional power of the purse” and pointedly reminds readers that “all federal officials and employees take an oath to uphold and protect the Constitution and its core tenets, including the congressional power of the purse.” The consequence of Congress abdicating its right to information about the spending power could have the effect of eliminating Congress’s very control over that power.
Finally, the Senate must take seriously its role in the impeachment trial of President Trump. On Tuesday, when impeachment presentations start, these troves of new information will almost certainly begin to be aired in the chamber as senators listen to the presentation of the House managers. The Senate must demand and obtain all documents and testimony of those with knowledge of the president’s actions who refused to obey lawful subpoenas issued by the House in the impeachment inquiry, like the administration members Mick Mulvaney, Robert Blair and Michael Duffey — as well as documents and other information that is directly relevant to the decision before them.
Clearly some are feeling the heat. Asked by Manu Raju of CNN whether the Senate should consider new evidence as part of the impeachment trial, Senator Martha McSally, Republican of Arizona, blithely responded: “Manu, you’re a liberal hack. I’m not talking to you.” Attacking reporters who ask fair questions won’t solve their problem. Only a thorough and honest reckoning with the oaths they have taken as senators and as impeachment jurors will do that.