$2.9 Million Homes in California
Burlingame, a city in San Mateo County, between San Francisco and Palo Alto, has a population of about 28,000 and a median home sale price of $1.95 million. This Arts and Crafts house is in Burlingame Park, a historic neighborhood a few blocks from the center of one of the city’s two retail districts. There, you’ll find restaurants, boutiques, the Copenhagen Bakery and an Apple store.
Size: 2,180 square feet
Price per square foot: $1,329
Indoors: The single-level house was renovated by a previous owner and includes a recently upgraded kitchen and bathrooms. (The current owner bought the property less than six years ago.)
A central foyer with oak floors and a vintage brass pendant light opens, though windowed pocket doors, into a living room with extensive millwork and built-ins. The wood-burning brick fireplace is flanked by square, glass-fronted bookshelves, each with an adjacent window seat. The large dining room, entered from the foyer through a second set of pocket doors, has another wall of Mission-style cabinetry.
The kitchen includes white wood cabinets with marble countertops, a white bead-board wainscot and a butcher-block work area with seating placed against a wall, to make efficient use of the narrow space. The gas range is Thermador, the dishwasher Bosch and the refrigerator Sub-Zero.
Off the dining room is an office with floor-to-ceiling bookshelves and a built-in corner desk and upper cabinets.
A windowed door with milk-glass panes opens to the large master suite. The master bathroom was finished with marble surfaces, a roomy tub with an integrated shower and a toilet closet. Two guest bedrooms share a bathroom faced in white subway tile, with a combined tub and shower. There is also a powder room.
A pocket door in the kitchen offers access to a carpeted, finished basement with recessed and natural light.
Outdoor space: The house occupies a corner lot with lawns and hedges and is wrapped by a white picket fence. The front door is tucked under the roof of an elevated front porch. French doors in the kitchen open to a large rear deck. Parking is in a detached one-car garage and an off-street paved area with an electric vehicle charger.
Taxes: $31,878 (estimated)
Contact: Raziel Ungar, Compass, 650-822-7088; burlingameproperties.com
This property is in East Ojai, two blocks north of Grand Avenue. It is surrounded by large citrus and olive ranches, and has the feeling of Tuscany, with bigger mountains. It is four miles east of the Ojai Valley Inn and Spa, a 250-acre resort that is a centerpiece of this city of 7,500, which is known for its outstanding beauty and prohibition of chain stores. Downtown Los Angeles is 80 miles southeast, and Santa Barbara is 36 miles west.
Size: 1,600 square feet
Price per square foot: $1,801
Indoors: The home was bought four years ago and brought back from a ruinous state. Original features, including sections of its redwood siding, were restored or given period replacements.
A wood-faced foyer leads to a combined living-and-dining room, where glass spans the distance between a ceramic-tile floor and a beamed, slatted ceiling, and the redwood walls have an artful, patchwork look. A large tile fireplace is fronted by a custom wrought-iron screen that swings open like a gate. (The artisan who created it also designed the iron gates that admit cars and pedestrians to the property.)
The renovated kitchen is long and lean, with white cabinetry, dark countertops, floating stainless steel shelves and high-end appliances, including a Viking range.
The three bedrooms all have slatted redwood ceilings, paneled walls, tiled floors and expansive windows. The en suite master bathroom includes a walk-in subway-tiled shower; the guest bathroom has a combined shower and tub.
There is a separate studio building with a room for lounging or working, and a sink and counter area off to the side.
Outdoor space: The professionally landscaped property has lush greenery and multiple patios; one includes an outdoor grill built in rough stone near the recently built swimming pool, while another overlooks a koi pond to the side.
Taxes: $36,025 (estimated)
Contact: Sharon MaHarry, MaHarry & Cadenasso Real Estate Team, 805-766-7889; 805properties.com
The renowned Austrian-American architect Richard Neutra designed this one-story home in the Encino district of Los Angeles for a physician and his wife. It has remained in the same family ever since, along with extensive correspondence and transaction records related to its construction.
The house faces north, with views of the San Gabriel Mountains. It is a mile and a half above Ventura Boulevard, which is lined with chain stores and other businesses. Los Encinos State Historic Park is about two miles north, and Westridge-Canyonback Wilderness Park and Mulholland Drive are the same distance south. Downtown Los Angeles is 20 miles southeast. The Van Nuys Airport, which is popular with private jet owners, is six miles north.
Size: 2,676 square feet
Price per square foot: $1,074
Indoors: Passing through a glassed-in front atrium space with plantings, and a red double front door, you enter a freshly painted and carpeted area that extends the width of the house, with a transparent back wall overlooking the pool and distant mountains.
At one end is a living room with a floating fireplace along a side wall. A sliding partition that runs along a ceiling track closes off the living room from the adjacent dining area, and a second partition separates the dining room from the kitchen on the other side.
The kitchen includes ash cabinetry with hardware that is original and tile countertops that are not, and a retractable shade to block sunlight streaming through the rear wall of glass. A third sliding partition divides the kitchen from the room beyond it — a den with wood paneling and built-in floating shelves.
To the right of the entrance is a hallway leading to the three bedrooms. The master suite, which looks out to the pool, has wraparound glass walls and a private outdoor patio and putting green. The master bathroom includes double sinks and a sunken Roman tub with a shower head; the period-appropriate linoleum flooring is new.
Two guest bedrooms share the hall bathroom in between, which has a sunken bathtub and separate dressing room with a long vanity. A fourth bedroom behind the den looks out to the front atrium and is staged as an office. It has access to a bathroom with a shower; this room also opens to the pool area. A niche with washer-and-dryer hookups is here, as well.
Outdoor space: The almost-half-acre lot is large and level for the neighborhood, with extraordinary views. If the property were bought by a developer and this historic home were torn down, as is happening frequently in the hot Los Angeles real estate market, it would be a veritable crime. Parking, for two cars, is in an attached carport.
Taxes: $35,919 (estimated)
Contact: Andrew Manning, Berkshire Hathaway Home Services California Properties, 818-522-3972; bhhscalifornia.com