This Town Is Known For Opioids: Can It Escape That Image?
PORTSMOUTH, Ohio — Jeremy Burnside has a dream that someday, someone will write a story about his town that has nothing to do with drugs.
Mr. Burnside, a personal-injury lawyer turned civic leader who works out of a converted church, lives in Portsmouth, an Ohio River town that has become something of a national symbol of the opioid crisis. The town fell early — and hard — into the addiction that later consumed the nation. Reporters from all over (including from this newspaper) came to write about it. There was even a book. The cover was Portsmouth’s town square.
It is true his town has a problem, Mr. Burnside says. But it also has an art museum, a circus school, a dog park, a new restaurant, a skating rink and a university — and somehow those things never get mentioned.
Mr. Burnside, 41, has tried everything to get journalists’ attention.
He and other community members arranged several Guinness World Records challenges — the most people caroling at the same time, and the most people simultaneously wrapping Christmas presents. (Portsmouth broke the record for both.) He organized a day of flower planting, power washing and lamppost painting that drew hundreds of people. He invited national reporters to a news conference that doubled as a pep rally complete with a D.J. and cheerleaders shaking pompoms.

It is a familiar problem: When an area gets labeled — say Appalachia with poverty or Chicago with gun violence — how do you get people to realize it is also about a lot more?
“All reporters ever want to talk about is drugs,” said Sue Burke, a sixth-generation Portsmouth resident and gardener who volunteers planting and tending the flowerpots downtown. “My kids all have master’s degrees. My daughter-in-law has a doctorate. We have a lot of intelligent, successful people here, and it makes me mad that we are never ever seen that way.”
Mr. Burnside has joined a small group of younger residents — business owners, college professors, Iraq war veterans and museum curators — who people say have brought new energy to solving Portsmouth’s problems. Their goal is to change both the image and reality of life in town, figuring that you cannot really do one without the other.
“They are working harder at this than anybody I’ve ever seen,” said Ed Hughes, who recently retired as head of the Counseling Center, Portsmouth’s main rehabilitation facility. “I think we may be adjusting to the fact that if things are going to get better, we have to do it. The cavalry is not coming.”
As part of Appalachia, Portsmouth has frustrations that are also regional — a rural place that feels looked down on by urban ones. But it is more than image. How it looks to the outside affects how it feels on the inside, townspeople said. Stories seem to miss the effort being poured into the community, like an Etch A Sketch erasing years of work.
“You feel overlooked,” said Drew Carter, a graduate of Shawnee State University in town, who was giving away free turkeys to a long line of needy families a few days before Christmas. “You’ve been in the trenches doing this for years. But people come here and act like you are invisible.”
The coverage can be daunting. When Shawnee State offered a job to Thomas Bunting, a political theorist from Michigan, he felt exhilarated. But then he started reading the news.
“I felt like, ‘How will I have friends, how will I have children around this?’” said Mr. Bunting, 31.
When he arrived, he was pleasantly surprised.
“I don’t think the articles are untrue, they’re just incomplete,” he said. “I just don’t live in the Portsmouth they describe. I find it a great place to be. We have friends. It’s a great community.”
He added, “I’m from a dying town in Michigan and people there care less about it.”
As for drugs, the problem is still bad. Scioto County, which includes Portsmouth, still has one of the highest death rates in Ohio. Last year, 69 people overdosed in the county, the most in two decades. But the town has made progress in how it deals with the problem, and the stories of common purpose and overcoming adversity get overshadowed by tales of tragedy, residents say.
“We’ve put in programs, we have hotlines, we are getting addicts training, we are doing art therapy, we are building them back up,” said Cinamon Wellington, a former social worker who owns the Happy Pot, a paint-your-own-pottery studio.
“Aren’t people curious about how the story ends?”
But the story is far from over. Opinions, for the most part, are still set against people in recovery, Mr. Hughes said.
“Half the people in this coffee shop would say, ‘Why are we spending so much time on these people?’” he said, looking around a busy cafe, Lofts Coffee Company.
At the same time, something is happening, he said, pointing out that places like the coffee shop did not exist 10 years ago.
Dale King, 39, a former Army intelligence officer, said he was as judgmental as anyone in 2007 when he returned to Portsmouth, his hometown, restless and searching for a new mission. What he found was a town full of pain clinics and drug addicts.
“I was like, ‘You guys are losers, get it together — clearly you can’t because you are weak individuals,’” he said. He built a CrossFit gym and told himself the opioid crisis was not his problem. But when he got to know a young man in recovery, that changed him.
“Hearing the person’s story makes you realize, ‘Wow, they are dealing with something so intense,’” he said in December.
Now he employs six people in recovery, both at his gym and in a second business making military-inspired grooming goods — first-aid ointment, beard oil and soap shaped like grenades. He produced a video about the man who changed him.
“There’s this feeling now that it’s our turn to fix it,” he said. “What works? I don’t know. But let’s start with, ‘Tell me your name and let me get to know you.’”
Some newcomers are more reserved. Kathy Sue Allegra, 61, who moved away and raised a family in Houston, said drugs have scraped away parts of her cousins’ lives, and that pretending otherwise was sugarcoating reality.
Of Mr. Burnside and his friends, she said, “I would like for them to be more realistic.”
But the town has drawn her in, too. She moved back last year, buying the bakery she used to visit as a child.
“I’m still trying to figure out why I’m here,” she said, making change for a customer buying a sticky bun. “I think this town needs some new blood.”
Any lasting change will require real efforts to stitch people in recovery back into the community, Mr. Hughes said. That means attitudes have to change. Another Iraq veteran in town, Tim Wolfe, thinks there may be signs.
Now a developer, Mr. Wolfe offers people in recovery a two-week vocational course, helping them find a place to live and get a driver’s license. He then pays between $10 and $15 an hour to graduates who join his development team. He has also found people jobs in his restaurant and in a truck building company. He loves getting to know people and has spent hours arguing their cases in government offices.
“I am falling in love with all these guys,” he said. “They have crazy stories I cannot begin to understand.”
One night in December, the wife of a friend from one of the town’s influential families called and asked if she could hire one of his workers. She even knew his name.
“I hung up and called Dale,” Mr. Wolfe said. “I said, ‘Dude, it’s changing.’ If someone like that is warming up to these guys, it’s changing.”