What’s on TV Friday: ‘Lincoln Rhyme’ and ‘AJ and the Queen’
LINCOLN RHYME: HUNT FOR THE BONE COLLECTOR 8 p.m. on NBC. Human bones are strewn about New York in “The Bone Collector,” Jeffery Deaver’s 1997 novel about Lincoln Rhyme, a forensics expert who solves cases without leaving his apartment. He works with a younger detective who does the ground work in tracing a serial killer. The book was adapted into a 1999 feature with Denzel Washington and Angelina Jolie, who had only the roughly two-hour running time of the film to crack the case. This new TV series adaptation should give its stars more wiggle room. It casts Russell Hornsby as Rhyme, who is left unable to walk after an injury on the job. So he works remotely, electronically communicating with a young officer (played by Arielle Kebbel), who pursues the case’s mysteries with Rhyme in her ear.
BILL BURR PRESENTS: THE RINGERS 11 p.m. on Comedy Central. The comedians Rosebud Baker, Jordan Temple and Josh Adam Meyers will be the first to appear on this new stand-up show from Bill Burr. Episodes are a sampler of rising talent, with three comics each performing a short set, after briefinterviews with Burr. It’s an opportunity, Burr explains, for the comics to net “a TV credit that’ll get you a hotel room where your door opens up to the hallway, rather than a parking lot.”
AJ AND THE QUEEN Stream on Netflix. “I’m not your mother,” RuPaul Charles says in this new comedy series, “I’m a drag queen on a cross-country tour.” He’s talking to AJ (Izzy Gaspersz), a neglected 10-year-old who covertly hitches a ride as Charles’s character, Ruby Red, sets off on a road trip. Turns out they kind of need each other: Each is leaving behind a troubled past, and they help each other work through that as they travel the country by mobile home. Their first stop: Pittsburgh. It’s a city, Ruby Red tells AJ, where everyone is so friendly, “it’s like going back in time.”
THE LITTLE STRANGER (2018) Stream on HBO platforms. Domhnall Gleeson plays a doctor to haunted British blue bloods in this horror movie, an adaptation of a Gothic novel by Sarah Waters. Directed by Lenny Abrahamson (“Room”), the film is set around a sprawling estate in Warwickshire, England, in the late 1940s. There’s suspense in the air — plenty of mysterious, spooky episodes can found here — but there’s also a heavy amount of social commentary: This is a stately home in decline, and the story is told through Gleeson’s character, a commoner who wouldn’t be permitted to get comfortable there even if it weren’t possibly haunted. “The twisting and cracking of the British class system is always fascinating to observe, and ‘The Little Stranger’ traces the details of its chosen moment of social change with precision and subtlety,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The New York Times, “and with its own layers of somewhat dubious nostalgia.”