The Union of the Kushners and the Trumps Seems Like Kismet
Toward the end of Andrea Bernstein’s ambitious first book, “American Oligarchs: The Kushners, the Trumps and the Marriage of Money and Power,” she delivers a golden nugget of an anecdote. Soon after the 2016 presidential election, Sergey Kislyak, then the longtime Russian ambassador to the United States, was desperate to have a meeting with Jared Kushner, Donald Trump’s son-in-law, the scion of a prosperous and ambitious New Jersey real estate family, and a likely senior White House adviser to the new president of the United States. The canny Kislyak figured correctly that Kushner would be a key player in Washington and was looking for an effective channel into TrumpWorld.
For his part, as Kushner later told the Senate Intelligence Committee during lengthy testimony in July 2017, he was not particularly interested in meeting the Russian diplomat. That was until Kislyak suggested a meeting between Kushner and Sergey Gorkov, the head of Vnesheconombank, or VEB, the Russian state-owned development bank. To get Kushner on the hook for the meeting, Kislyak told him that Gorkov had a “direct line” to Vladimir Putin and could provide insight to Kushner about how Putin was viewing “the new administration” and how best the two countries could work together after years of strain.
They met on Dec. 13, a month or so after the election, although not at Trump Tower in New York City, where the president-elect was making a big show of evaluating people who might join the new administration, but rather around the corner at the offices of Colony Capital. “At the time of the meeting VEB was (and remained) the subject of U.S. sanctions imposed in the wake of the Crimea invasion,” Bernstein reports. There was some dispute about what transpired at the meeting: Kushner insisted to Congress it had nothing to do with the possibility of VEB financing any of the Kushner family’s real estate projects “or any private business of any kind,” although at the time there had been plenty of press about how the Kushners faced an existential financial threat at 666 Fifth Avenue, its overleveraged Midtown Manhattan office tower; VEB later told The Washington Post the meeting was essentially a new business pitch with Kushner, as “the head of his family’s real estate business.” To further distance himself from any hint of having sought financing from VEB, Kushner told the Mueller investigators that he did not prepare for the meeting with Gorkov and hadn’t even bothered to do a Google search.
[ Read an excerpt from “American Oligarchs.” ]
But this is where it gets interesting, in Bernstein’s telling. While Kushner would have us believe he was indifferent to meeting Gorkov, Gorkov was the opposite of indifferent about meeting Kushner. He had, in fact, studied the Kushner family history — a history of persecution and survival in Belarus during World War II that Bernstein dramatically captures in the early chapters of her book — and he wanted Kushner to know he had done his homework. He brought two gifts for Kushner: a piece of art from Novogrudok, the ghetto from which Kushner’s grandparents had escaped to freedom in America, and a bag of dirt from the same village.
If Kushner was moved by Gorkov’s thoughtful gifts, he did not let on to either Congress or to the Mueller investigators. But Bernstein sees the symbolism. The bag of dirt, she writes, was “reminiscent of the bags of dirt that Rae Kushner” — Kushner’s grandmother — “and her family had dug from the earth and hidden in the walls of Novogrudok ghetto so the Nazis wouldn’t know they had dug a tunnel to safety.” Dramatic enough on its own. But Bernstein sees deeper meaning that she wants us to know is lost on her subjects, the Kushners and the Trumps. “Had it not been for those bags of dirt,” she writes, “Rae would never have made it out of the ghetto, to the forest, to the refugee camp, or to New York, where she had four children, including one named after her brother who had died during the escape. And whose own son, Jared Corey Kushner, was now one of the most powerful people in a new and uncertain world slinking again toward darkness.”
[ This book was one of our most anticipated titles of January. See the full list. ]
This passage shows Bernstein at her narrative best: reportorial, pointed and unsparing, while reinforcing her theme that the Trumps and the Kushners are ruthless, cold, power hungry and endlessly ambitious. Her narrative traces the origin of the myths about the two families, how these callous, opportunistic dynasties were finally joined at the hip through the 2009 marriage of Kushner and Ivanka Trump, Trump’s older daughter and most-favored child, at Trump’s Bedminster, N.J., golf club, and what the present generations were willing to do to relatives, friends and foes — anyone, really — to slake their seemingly unquenchable thirsts.
But it is also true that Bernstein has picked a most difficult topic to probe for new insights. So much has been written already about the Trumps and the Kushners — and not just in the four-plus years since Donald Trump descended the escalator in Trump Tower spewing vitriol and hate — that to add new material to that grotesque canon is an exceptionally challenging task for any reporter, even one as diligent as Bernstein. While “American Oligarchs” is a rich and highly readable compendium, one does not finish it and think, “I’ve just been bedazzled and infuriated anew.” Rather, the experience of consuming this book is more along the lines of reading an encyclopedia of many of the hateful things we already know, or think we know, about these two families.
As Bernstein shares in her “Note on Sources,” she did not have access to Trump or his family. She did not interview the Kushners, although Charles Kushner, Jared Kushner’s father, answered some of her questions through his attorney; Jared Kushner, through the White House, provided some factual information but did not answer her questions. She obviously didn’t have Anonymous’s access to the White House, or even Michael Wolff’s. Fear was yet another obstacle to overcome. Most of the more than 200 people she did interview — many of them with firsthand knowledge of events, and on good terms with the Trumps and the Kushners — declined to be identified in any way.
Make no mistake, Bernstein is an intrepid reporter, best known for her work at WNYC, the New York City public radio station, and in particular for her relentless digging about Bridgegate, that notorious only-in-New-Jersey story that probably cost Chris Christie, the former governor, the chance of making a serious run for the Republican nomination that Trump won instead. Of course, as Bernstein also shares, Christie was the United States attorney in New Jersey who famously prosecuted Kushner’s father for evading taxes, witness tampering, making illegal campaign contributions and hiring a prostitute to seduce his brother-in-law as part of a family feud. When Charles Kushner pleaded guilty, in 2004, he served 14 months in a federal prison.
It was, understandably, a slight his oldest son could not possibly abide or forgive, especially when talk turned to Christie’s chances of becoming Trump’s vice president or his attorney general. It’s clear in Bernstein’s telling that Kushner nixed Christie at every turn with more than a little glee, much to Christie’s consternation. Revenge is a dish best served cold, and Jared obliged. I, for one, would have loved a far more detailed and anecdote-filled treatment of the Christie-Kushner feud, among others, than the one Bernstein provides in “American Oligarchs.”
But Bernstein is on a different mission. As an investigative journalist, she wants to have impact — and she worries that the presidency of Donald Trump has made that very difficult. “But then I realized something,” she concludes: “The act of telling the story is itself an action, a chance, a tilt toward the future. I still believe in truth, and facts. I still believe that the telling reinforces those things. I believe that in the telling, there is hope.”