Brexit, Coronavirus, Huawei: Your Thursday Briefing
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.
European legislators on Wednesday approved the terms of Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union. It will formally take place on Friday at midnight, Brussels time, bringing three and a half years of confusion and political fighting to an end.
But a potentially volatile new chapter — in which London and Brussels try to hash out a trade deal during a transition period that lasts only until the end of 2020 — is just beginning.
And while Brexit has produced some unity among the remaining 27 E.U. nations, our chief diplomatic correspondent in Europe writes, it also weakens the bloc’s diplomatic clout and highlights its internal divisions (between France and Germany, for example).
Looking ahead: Momentum is gathering for another independence vote in Scotland. An electorate that opposed leaving the E.U. worries that prolonged trade talks could hurt Scottish industries intertwined with the global supply chain.
A World Health Organization committee plans to meet in Geneva today — for the second time in a week — to decide whether the Wuhan coronavirus epidemic is a global health emergency. Here’s the latest.
The death toll in China rose overnight to 170, up from 132, the government said this morning. Infections worldwide jumped to 7,711 from about 6,000 on Wednesday, according to the W.H.O. and Chinese officials.
Context: No one outside mainland China has died from the disease. The number of infections there already exceeds those from SARS, a respiratory infection that spread across the country 17 years ago and killed 774 people worldwide, but experts caution that comparing the two diseases is difficult.
Yesterday: In an effort to stop further transmission of the virus, British Airways and Air Canada suspended all flights to the Chinese mainland (but not to Hong Kong).
Closer look: The outbreak is a stark reminder of how dependent the world’s economy is on China, our business correspondent in Hong Kong writes. Global brands like Starbucks, Ikea, Ford and Toyota are shutting down stores and factories, while Apple is rerouting supply chains.
What’s next: If efforts to contain an outbreak fail, public health authorities will focus on minimizing the harm done to people and communities. They’re particularly concerned about the disease spreading in Africa.
The Palestinian leadership largely rejected the Israel-friendly Mideast peace plan that President Trump announced on Tuesday, but their options for responding are limited.
They could choose to push back against it — perhaps by unleashing violence or walking away from the security cooperation that has long helped protect Israelis from terrorism. But that’s unlikely if Mahmoud Abbas, the octogenarian president of the Palestinian Authority, decides to prioritize staying in power.
A safer option for Mr. Abbas, our correspondents say, would be trying to weather the storm and hoping that Mr. Trump or Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel is defeated in upcoming elections.
Details: Mr. Trump’s plan departs from decades of American support for only modestly adjusting the Israeli borders drawn in 1967. It would deprive the Palestinians of nearly everything they wanted, including East Jerusalem as their national capital and the removal of Jewish settlements on the West Bank. It includes no concrete plans for a fully autonomous Palestinian state.
What’s next: The Palestinians have a four-year window to decide whether to engage in renewed talks with Israel, during which Mr. Netanyahu’s government has agreed to limit settlement building in parts of the West Bank that the plan has designated for Palestinians.
From the Chinese government’s perspective, Zulhumar Isaac, above, a Uighur woman from the far-western Xinjiang region, grew up in a model ethnic-minority family: Her mother was a Communist Party cadre, and her father worked at a newspaper that toed the party line.
But when President Xi Jinping’s government began cracking down on Uighurs, even her parents were detained. Our writer spent nearly a year documenting her effort to get them back.
Huawei: The European Union on Wednesday recommended that its members limit, but not ban, Huawei in their 5G rollouts, a day after Britain said it would let the Chinese company develop nonsensitive parts of its next-generation networks. Germany is expected to make a decision on Huawei in the coming months.
Impeachment: Republican leaders could call a vote for President Trump’s acquittal as soon as Friday. But if four or so Republicans agree to call witnesses and documents, his impeachment trial could continue well into February.
Mike Pompeo in Ukraine: The U.S. secretary of state, whose boss was impeached over dealings with Ukraine, is scheduled to meet in Kyiv today with the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky. (Ukraine — and Mr. Trump’s decision to fire the American ambassador there — figured in Mr. Pompeo’s recent clash with a respected American journalist, who later wrote a Times Op-Ed about it.)
Catching rays: Thermonuclear reactions inside the sun produce a pop, crackle and snap on its surface. A new telescope in Hawaii is checking that out.
Snapshot: Above, the Thwaites glacier in Antarctica, where scientists have recorded unusually warm water beneath the ice. The glacier plays a key role in holding back ice that, if melted, would raise the world’s oceans by nearly four feet over centuries, putting many coastal cities underwater.
In memoriam: Lina Ben Mhenni, an activist who blogged about the 2010-11 popular uprising in Tunisia that preceded the Arab Spring revolts, died in Tunis on Monday. She was 36 and had suffered from an autoimmune disease.
What we’re reading: This account of an attempt to do the Silicon Valley dopamine fast in The Cut. Melina Delkic, on the Briefings team, calls it “hilarious and weird,” adding, “I’m not sure what I just read, but I liked it.”
Cook: Take comfort in this recipe for cheesy cornbread muffins with hot honey butter.
Read: The actor Antonio Banderas told our reporter about his recent Oscar nomination and the heart attack that changed his life.
Go: Here’s how to ski in Europe on a tight budget. (Think Cervinia and Brides les Bains over Zermatt and Courchevel.)
Smarter Living: Not everyone develops social skills as a child. Here’s a primer for adults.
Today is the 72nd anniversary of the death of Mohandas Gandhi, who helped win India’s independence from Britain with a campaign of nonviolence and enshrined protections for all religions. Protesters challenging Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Hindu-nationalist agenda have been evoking Gandhi’s legacy — but so is Mr. Modi, to promote nationalism. Maria Abi-Habib, a South Asia correspondent for The Times, spoke with Mike  about the clash.
How have the protests changed since they started a few months ago?
They’re a lot broader. It’s not just Muslims or a bunch of liberal students, it’s people who see the India that Gandhi built, one of secularism and religious coexistence, giving way to a government that is bent on a sectarian narrative at a time when the economy is sputtering.
Do any scenes spring to mind?
Some protesters held a placard that read: “Dear Hindus, We rejected an Islamic state in 1947. Now it’s your turn to reject a Hindu state. Sincerely, Secular India.” That really spoke to me because 1947 was the partition, when Hindus in Pakistan decided to stay or flee to India, and Muslims in India had a similar choice.
India chose secularism in 1947. It was majority Hindu and said its strength was its diversity, and that it would embrace Christians and Muslims and Sikhs just as much as its Hindu citizens.
Why is one protest in particular — a highway sit-in by Muslim women in Delhi’s Shaheen Bagh neighborhood — seen as so significant?
Over all, India’s Muslim community has not been well organized in recent decades, but these protests have mobilized it. Shaheen Bagh has become a symbol of that. And women’s place in Indian Muslim homes has tended to be a conservative stereotype: They don’t come onto the streets, they don’t protest, they don’t mobilize. So Shaheen Bagh has really changed the game.