Don’t Blame Mental Illness
To the Editor:
Re “How to Combat Anti-Semitic Violence” (Op-Ed, Jan. 2):
As a Jewish American, I appreciated many of Mitchell D. Silber’s recommendations for combating anti-Semitic violence. As a psychiatrist, however, I am troubled by some of his statements regarding the role of mental illness in these attacks.
He refers to data he has reviewed showing that “approximately a third of the recent anti-Semitic attacks in New York are committed by people with histories of psychiatric problems.” I have not seen Mr. Silber’s data, so I don’t know what “psychiatric problems” his research has uncovered. However, an abundance of research has found no strong link between having “psychiatric problems” per se and an increased risk of violence. Indeed, individuals with serious mental illness are more often the victims of violent crimes than the perpetrators.
It is therefore unhelpful when Mr. Silber goes on to describe “mental health issues” as a “serious threat.” Nevertheless, when serious mental illness (such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder) goes untreated, the risk of violence does increase, particularly when substance abuse is involved.
For some such individuals, assertive community treatment — involving a 24/7, multidisciplinary team approach — may help reduce the potential for violence.
Ronald W. Pies
Lexington, Mass.
The writer is a professor of psychiatry at SUNY Upstate Medical University and Tufts University School of Medicine.
To the Editor:
“Year in Education: Stalled Test Scores, Increased College Costs” (news article, Dec. 28) misses what any educator would call the biggest happening in education in 2019: the resurgence of public schooling.
From the fights for better teaching and learning conditions, the issues that were at the core of the teacher strikes in Los Angeles and Chicago, to the renewed calls for funding in state capitals from Austin to Indianapolis to Boston, educators — supported by parents, students and others — were on the streets fighting for the public schools our children deserve.
Instead of national politicians singing the praises of a movement to blame teachers, seven presidential candidates spoke about the value of public education in a full-day forum near the end of last year. The constant chorus was not just the fight against a secretary of education who has sought to demonize public education, it was the voice of a nation that has come to value its neighborhood schools.
Randi Weingarten
Washington
The writer is president of the American Federation of Teachers.
To the Editor:
Re “For Brain Health, Correct Mild Hearing Loss,” by Jane E. Brody (Personal Health, Dec. 31):
As one who has studied hearing-related difficulties for 30 years, I heartily agree that if you suspect hearing loss, don’t let vanity (“I’m too young for hearing aids!”) or denial (“Everyone is mumbling!”) prevent you from seeking appropriate amplification. But realize that managing hearing loss is a journey, one that doesn’t end with the purchase of hearing aids.
Here are the guidelines I recommend to my patients:
Understand that it takes time and concerted effort to adapt to hearing aids; it doesn’t happen overnight. Engage in regular conversation, even if doing so is daunting, because social isolation leads to a downward emotional and cognitive spiral.
Exercise your auditory brain skills through structured listening practice. Maintain contact with others who have hearing loss, either in person or through social media, because you’ll benefit from their empathy and support.
Get an online coach who is a hearing professional. The more you learn about conversational strategies, the easier it will be to overcome your communication challenges.
Nancy Tye-Murray
St. Louis
The writer, a professor of otolaryngology at the Washington University School of Medicine, is chief executive of Customized Learning: Exercises for Aural Rehabilitation.