We Went to the National Mall to Ask Americans About Impeachment
WASHINGTON — The impeachment of President Trump has played out like a searing snapshot of the partisan divide, the two parties mostly inhabiting turf so different they might as well be on different planets.
We asked Americans visiting the National Mall last weekend to share their thoughts on impeachment. The goal was to see if people’s statements broke down as neatly and predictably on partisan lines as the vast majority of the views expressed in Congress.
One thing was clear: Almost everyone agreed that impeachment has been a fraught process that has further divided Americans and made them reconsider where we are as a nation. Alas, that may be all we agree on.
Ms. Morasch is a retired social worker from Fairfax City, Va. Though she voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, she is not registered with a party. She came to Washington to protest how the Senate was conducting the impeachment trial.
Mr. Mullis is a retired sports administration official from Houston. He is a Republican.
Mr. Williams is an entrepreneur who was visiting Washington from Philadelphia. He said he was “not a fan of Trump.”
Ms. Fletcher is a sophomore at Belmont University, in Nashville, who is studying music business. She is from Tulsa, Okla., and a registered Republican who said that if the election were today, she would “vote for Trump.”
Mr. Hadden is a veteran of the Vietnam War from North Augusta, S.C., and was in Washington for a funeral at Arlington National Cemetery. Politically, he leans Republican. He voted for Mr. Trump in 2016.
Ms. Hadden also voted for Mr. Trump and said she planned to do so again in November.
Ms. Williams was visiting Washington for the weekend from Columbus, Ohio, where she works in information technology. She is an independent who voted for Mrs. Clinton in 2016.
Mr. Gately is a project manager in HVAC sales in Raleigh, N.C. He said he tended to view himself as a “little bit of a moderate.”
Ms. Akins is from Norman, Okla., and is an account manager at a software company. She is a Democrat who was in Washington to tour the United States Capitol and witness the impeachment trial.
Mr. Riddle is an equipment company manager based in Charleston, W.Va., who identifies as a Republican.
Ms. Peebles is a cabinetmaker from Prineville, Ore., and identifies as a Republican. She said the impeachment against Mr. Trump — and overall partisan politics — had left her worried about the country’s future.