Two Dead in Explosion at Houston Plant
At least two people were killed in a large explosion at an industrial site in Houston on Friday that damaged dozens of houses nearby and uprooted residents, the authorities said.
The blast jolted residents from their beds in the early hours of the morning, blowing out windows and scattering debris across roughly half a mile.
The authorities said they have started a criminal investigation to try to determine the cause of the blast, but the Houston police chief, Art Acevedo, said there was no indication so far that the blast was caused by intentional acts.
“We have no reason to believe, we have no evidence at this point, that terrorism is involved,”  he added.
He said the two people killed were male and believed to be employees, but he did not identify them further. He added that they “cannot say” whether there would be more victims. At least 18 people have gone to or been transported to hospitals, the Houston Fire Department said.
Hours after the blast, the fire department was conducting searches of the residential areas around the site. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives joined the investigation, which the police chief said was initiated as standard protocol in a case that could be criminal if it was an act of negligence.
The Houston Police announced early on Friday that the explosion took place at the 4500 block of Gessner Road in the northwest area of the city. Traffic was blocked off in the area, and a shelter was set up at a nearby church. Though the explosion was near a number of industrial sites, there were working-class residential areas close by.
“This explosion was felt,” at quite a distance, the police chief said at a news conference on Friday morning.   


“We will advise of the possible cause of the explosion as soon as we have concrete info,” the fire department’s chief, Samuel Peña, said. The department said in a tweet that a hazardous material team was on the scene.
The blast appeared to have taken place at the site of Watson Grinding & Manufacturing, a machining and manufacturing company, Reuters reported. Calls to some of the officials there were not answered.
Chief Acevedo said that there were no reports of any air quality hazards, but crews had to secure supply lines of propylene, a gas, at the site.
By mid-day, nearly 200 homes had been searched and identified as damaged so far,  officials said. Residents whose homes were damaged evacuated to the nearby Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, which was set up as a shelter. By noon, it was serving food and providing information to residents who had fled, said Amy Peck, the councilwoman who represents the district of about 288,000.
“The homes were in close proximity to the location of the explosion,” she said. “Some of the homes were basically a few blocks away from the explosion, so it was very close.”
Some brought pets, and Ms. Peck said the population at the church could swell over the day.  “There are about 50 people so far and once people leaving work we might see more people this afternoon. We are working on that right now.”
The pre-dawn morning quiet had been shattered by the massive explosion and fires. Footage from local news helicopters showed a crumbled building burning and surrounded by police and fire vehicles in the darkness. Emergency response crews picked their way through wreckage, scanning flashlights over the rubble.
The chief warned people there would be serious repercussions if looting took place in any of the homes evacuated by residents. By mid-day, some people whose homes had been damaged were trying to patch up the giant holes that had been blown in to their roofs and windows, local television showed.
Karen Blok, who lived near the site, said that she was awakened by the sound of the blast. Sheetrock came down, and glass shattered. “At first I was in disbelief,” she said to ABC13 in an interview. “I saw glass all over. And as I walked through my house and I saw the mass destruction, I couldn’t believe it.”
Chief Acevedo said that flames and small explosions had continued for some time after the initial blast.
The blast’s impact on homes near the industrial site underscored the absence of ordinances that separate the city’s residential, business and industrial areas.
Houston has never had the kind of overall zoning framework that would keep potentially hazardous industrial sites and residences apart, said John Mixon, a retired University of Houston law professor, but added that a patchwork of “haphazard, one-shot” rules exist. Even when the city council has attempted to put overarching ordinances in place, voters have rejected them, in what he referred to as “the Houston way.”  
Last year, a disastrous fire burned for days at a petrochemical facility on the outskirts of the Houston metropolitan area. It was followed by another blaze at a chemical plant northeast of Houston that left one person dead and two others critically injured.
As dawn broke in Houston on Friday, footage showed a blackened shell of a building near the center of an industrial lot, and crumpled roofs and shorn walls on the structures around it.
In addition to the fire-fighting, attention turned to nearby residential areas. By noon, the authorities said that they were using drones, and had organized a grid search of residences. The fire chief said almost 200 houses had been searched before noon. Some had been torn off their foundations, he added.
Sheriff Ed Gonzalez of Harris County said on Twitter that reports began coming into the sheriff’s dispatch center around 4:15 a.m.
Residents described feeling their homes shake.
“It was pandemonium because we just didn’t know what was going on, it was a rather loud explosion,” one unnamed local resident told Houston news outlet ABC13 Eyewitness News, which was broadcasting from the scene about an hour after the blast.
He pointed to the cracked window of his house behind him, but he said that no one inside had been hurt.
Another Houston resident, Joey Charpentier, said a camera mounted on his window captured the moment of the explosion and he posted the video on Twitter: It showed a ball of flames erupting in the distance, past the trees of a yard. He noted that the camera was knocked down when the blast shattered the window.
Mike Iscovitz, a meteorologist for the local Fox News station, shared an image from the outlet’s radar feed that recorded the moment of the explosion as a brief but widespread flash across much of the Houston area.
Crowds of pajama-clad neighbors gathered on the streets as they surveyed the damage. A number of garage doors appeared bent and battered and the windows of some houses shattered.
Footage from other news outlets filming on Gessner Road show debris, some of it on fire, scattered across the road.