5 Classical Music Concerts to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘BLOOD MOON’ at the Baruch Performing Arts Center (Jan. 9, 7:30 p.m.; through Jan. 17). The essential Prototype festival opens with the premiere of this opera by the composer Garrett Fisher and the librettist Ellen McLaughlin. The piece blends music, choreography and puppetry in response to a 15th-century Noh play. Steven Osgood conducts a cast of three, with Juecheng Chen as the Moon, Nina Yoshida Nelsen as the Aunt and Wei Wu as the Nephew.
212-647-0251, prototypefestival.org
HERE AND NOW WINTER FESTIVAL at Bargemusic (Jan. 3, 7 p.m.; Jan. 4, 6 p.m.; Jan. 5, 4 p.m.). These three identical programs in Bargemusic’s periodic new-music celebration — as sprawling as ever — include works by Eric Moe, Takuma Itoh, Maya Miro Johnson, Veronika Krausas, Lev Zhurbin, Adolphus Hailstork, David Taylor and Kevin Puts, whose “Aria” for cello and piano is just one of several premieres on the bill.
800-838-3006, bargemusic.org
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Jan. 3-4, 8 p.m.; Jan. 7, 7:30 p.m.). Jeffrey Kahane leads the first subscription program of the new year, through Tuesday, conducting Haydn’s Symphony No. 96, Respighi’s “Trittico botticelliano” and Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 22, in which Kahane is also the soloist. Later in the coming week, from Jan. 9 to 11, Daniel Harding returns to the podium for the first time since 2011, conducting Strauss’s “Eine Alpensinfonie” and Grieg’s Piano Concerto, with Paul Lewis at the keyboard.
212-875-5656, nyphil.org
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
PARKER QUARTET AND ANTHONY MCGILL at Advent Lutheran Church (Jan. 6, 7:30 p.m.). Part of the free Music Monday series, this concert pairs Harvard’s quartet in residence with McGill, the principal clarinetist of the New York Philharmonic, for Mozart’s Clarinet Quintet. Then the quartet will perform Esa-Pekka Salonen’s “Homunculus” and Shostakovich’s String Quartet No. 9.
musicmondays.org
‘PORGY AND BESS’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Jan. 8, 7:30 p.m.; through Feb. 15). James Robinson’s sell-out production of Gershwin’s classic has proved so popular that the Met has added three performances to this second run of the season. Much of the same cast returns from the premiere, albeit with one or two substitutions on certain dates. Kevin Short is Porgy (Eric Owens resumes the role starting on Jan. 15), with Angel Blue as Bess, Janai Brugger as Clara, Latonia Moore as Serena, Denyce Graves as Maria, Frederick Ballentine as Sportin’ Life, Alfred Walker as Crown and Donovan Singletary as Jake. David Robertson conducts.
212-362-6000, metopera.org