Sheldon Silver’s Corruption Conviction Is Partly Overturned
A federal appeals court on Tuesday partly overturned the 2018 corruption conviction of Sheldon Silver, once the powerful speaker of the New York State Assembly, but allowed much of the conviction to stand — most likely ending his hopes of remaining out of prison.
Mr. Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan’s Lower East Side, had been sentenced to seven years in prison for accepting nearly $4 million in illicit payments in return for taking official actions in separate schemes on behalf of a cancer researcher, Robert N. Taub of Columbia University, and two real estate developers.
In its unanimous ruling, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld Mr. Silver’s conviction in the real estate scheme and a separate money-laundering count, but overturned his conviction related to his arrangement with Dr. Taub.
Judge Richard C. Wesley, writing for the panel, said prosecutors had not identified with enough specificity the particular types of acts Mr. Silver was to perform for Dr. Taub in return for accepting a bribe.
“Without a requirement that an official must promise to influence a particular question or matter,” Judge Wesley wrote, “any official who accepts a thing of value and then later acts to the benefit of the donor, in any manner, could be vulnerable to criminal prosecution.”
Mr. Silver, who has been free on bail, will now have to be resentenced by the trial judge, Valerie E. Caproni of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Mr. Silver, 75, served as speaker for more than two decades and influenced nearly every major aspect of state politics. His conviction in May 2018 came during a retrial: He was first convicted in November 2015 of honest services fraud, money laundering and extortion in one of the two most prominent public corruption trials in New York City in years.
Just two weeks after Mr. Silver’s first trial concluded, the State Senate’s majority leader, Dean G. Skelos, a Long Island Republican, was also convicted of federal corruption charges. Both men forfeited their seats in the State Legislature upon being found guilty, and the trials shed light on Albany’s culture of secrecy and influence peddling.
Mr. Silver, who was sentenced to 12 years in prison, appealed, and his conviction was overturned by another Second Circuit panel. That panel cited a 2016 United States Supreme Court decision involving Bob McDonnell, a former Republican governor of Virginia, which narrowed the legal definition of corruption.
Judge Wesley’s opinion on Tuesday, which was joined by Judges Raymond J. Lohier Jr. and Richard J. Sullivan, indicated that the ruling was narrow and should not affect the prosecution of bribery in most cases.
In the scheme that the panel affirmed, prosecutors showed that Mr. Silver had arranged for the two real estate developers, Glenwood Management and the Witkoff Group, to refer certain tax business to the law firm Goldberg & Iryami, which also sent Mr. Silver a portion of its fees. Mr. Silver then supported legislation that benefited the developers, prosecutors said.
Mr. Silver’s lawyer, Meir Feder, and James M. Margolin, a spokesman for the United States Attorney’s Office in Manhattan, each declined to comment on the ruling.
Despite its vacating of Mr. Silver’s convictions in the scheme involving Dr. Taub, the panel noted that there was “overwhelming evidence that Silver knowingly accepted referrals in exchange” for action.
Prosecutors had alleged that Mr. Silver arranged for the New York State Department of Health to award Dr. Taub grants totaling $500,000 in return for Dr. Taub’s agreeing to refer patients with potentially lucrative legal claims to a law firm, Weitz & Luxenberg, which gave part of its fees to Mr. Silver.
“From the moment Taub approached Silver about research funding, Silver knew that he had power over something of great value to Taub,” Judge Wesley wrote. “He then chose to abuse that power for personal gain.”
But Judge Wesley said the statute of limitations barred the court from considering those awards, which occurred before 2007. He said Mr. Silver’s later acts to help Dr. Taub, like securing an Assembly resolution recognizing him and helping him obtain permits for a charity race, were insufficient to show such an agreement.
“We find no evidence in the record from which a rational jury could conclude that any quid pro quo between Silver and Taub related to official acts existed after 2007,” Judge Wesley wrote.
“The only promise that could be inferred from the evidence presented at trial is that Silver promised to keep Taub happy as the opportunities to do so arose,” but such a promise, without more, fell short of what the law required, the judge added.
Berit Berger, executive director of the Center for the Advancement of Public Integrity at Columbia Law School, said: “Ultimately, the circuit is saying they need more specificity from the government, and that’s not a terrible thing. It will put defendants and the public on notice about the details of the corrupt exchange and what benefit the public official was offering in exchange for the bribe.”
She added, “I don’t see this meaningfully affecting the government’s ability to bring significant public corruption cases.”
Ms. Berger, a former federal prosecutor in New York, also noted that Judge Caproni, when she resentences Mr. Silver, may take into account all of his relevant conduct, including the scheme with Dr. Taub.
“She could very well find that the same sentence is appropriate,” Ms. Berger said.
Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York, a watchdog group, said that the appeals panel on Tuesday “had no alternative but to follow the bad precedent set by McDonnell and let Shelly Silver off the hook.”
“Nevertheless,” she said, “he will be punished for at least one of his crimes.”