Richard Gere and Peter Dinklage Bundle Up for ‘Three Christs’
An icy wind cut through the Lower East Side last Thursday outside a screening of “Three Christs” at the Regal Essex Crossing cinema.
Richard Gere kept his coat and scarf on for the red carpet, as did Peter Dinklage, his co-star, who wore a snug woolen cap. Bundled-up guests, including Edie Falco, Debra Winger and Chris Noth, came in behind them.
The film is adapted from “The Three Christs of Ypsilanti,” a 1964 book about three patients with paranoid schizophrenia, each of whom claimed to be Jesus. Despite the serious subject matter, Jon Avnet, the director and co-writer, said the cast subjected him to a fair amount of ribbing on set.
What did they pick on him about? “You name it,” Mr. Avnet said. “Imitating my behavior, my mannerisms, how I speak. I’m a very easy target.”
Julianna Margulies, whose red lip and nails popped against her Nili Lotan leopard coat, identified Mr. Gere as one of the culprits. “There wasn’t a moment when one of them wasn’t teasing the other one, all the time,” she said.
Mr. Gere, grinning broadly, said he needled the director about “everything.” “He’s pedantic and he’s kind of dizzy, but he’s dizzy like a fox,” he said.
After the screening, guests repaired to Omar’s La Boite on Broome Street for an after-party. There, Timo Weiland, the designer, Alex Lundqvist, the model, and Dale Moss, the football player, formed a small knot by the bar.
Waiters ferried trays of oysters and potato croquettes into the back room where Kevin Aviance, a fixture of downtown night life, was D.J.ing. Some guests danced provocatively on the club’s stripper pole, though none of the film’s stars did, to the disappointment of party photographers.
Two weeks before the Recording Academy presents the Grammy awards in Los Angeles, the academy’s New York chapter gathered on Monday at Second, an event space near Herald Square, to toast local nominees with an open bar and meatball buffet.
Nominated guests included Gloria Gaynor, Emily King and numerous Broadway actors competing in the category for best musical theater album.
“I never dreamed that I’d be nominated for a Grammy,” said Aaron Tveit, a star of “Moulin Rouge! The Musical.”
On an EGOT bingo card — that is, the sought-after quadfecta of Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony awards — which one does he think is the most difficult to win? “The Tony is the hardest one of the EGOT,” Mr. Tveit said.
Karen Olivo, his co-star, saw it differently. “I have the Tony, so I’m good,” she said. “The Oscar, that’s the hardest. It’s the smallest pool, and there are many more hands to shake and babies to kiss.”
But many of the Broadway actors agreed that the Grammys may be the most elusive. “In our plot for world domination, this is a vital and important leg,” said Patrick Vaill, who is part of the cast of “Oklahoma!
Reeve Carney, a star of “Hadestown,” regretted the Grammys didn’t coincide with a day off for the show. “We would love to be at the Grammys, but we don’t want to miss a performance to do it,” he said.
And will the cast be celebrating if they win?
“If someone’s paying for drinks, absolutely,” said Eva Noblezada, his co-star. (Although the pair were observed sharing a discreet caress, they declined to comment on reports they have become romantic partners offstage.)
The cast of “Ain’t Too Proud: The Life and Times of the Temptations” was also ready to celebrate. “We’ll be at the theater on that day, so if they want to buy us a drink after the show, we’ll be right there,” said Ephraim Sykes, who was joined by Derrick Baskin, Jawan M. Jackson, Saint Aubyn and James Harkness.
“We like bourbon,” said Mr. Aubyn. “Bring a bottle to the stage door.”
“Unopened,” Mr. Jackson added.