Property Tax Overhaul: Winners and Losers
[Want to get New York Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.]
It’s Monday.
Weather: Expect a sunny day, with a high in the mid-50s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Feb. 12 (Lincoln’s Birthday).
“The inequities have gotten worse and worse, and we intend to look at the whole question of property taxes.”
That was Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan borough president in 1990, voicing a concern then that was shared by many elected officials in the city. David N. Dinkins was the mayor, and top officials in his administration said property tax reform was a high priority.
But little, if anything, happened.
Now, there is a new effort to revamp the city’s property tax code.
Currently, people who own multimillion-dollar brownstones in Brooklyn and high-rise co-ops by Central Park often pay less in taxes than working-class homeowners in the South Bronx, relative to the value of their properties.
Under the new plan, that could change. The new system would raise the same amount of tax revenue for the city, but it would redistribute who paid what.
The plan was developed by a high-level city commission empowered by the mayor and City Council speaker. It could affect 90 percent of homeowners in the city.
[Tax system favoring Central Park co-ops and Brooklyn brownstones could end.]
Like earlier efforts, this plan might go nowhere, given concerns of residents whose property taxes could increase. It must be approved by the governor, mayor, City Council and State Legislature. Expect a lot of lobbying.
For now, though, here are winners and losers from the plan:
Parts of Queens, Staten Island and the Bronx: Single-family homeowners there would see lower property tax bills, according to Marc V. Shaw, the commission’s chairman. He also said certain co-ops and condominiums in parts of the Bronx would see lower tax bills.
Low-income homeowners: They might qualify for a “partial homestead exemption” that would limit tax bills to a certain percentage of household income. The city commission had not specified what that income threshold should be.
Upper West Side and Harlem: Some property taxes there may increase. Robert Jackson, a Democratic state senator who represents the area, said, “I am concerned about anyone’s tax bills going up, but the bottom line is that New York City must have a system that is fair for everyone.”
Brownstone Brooklyn and Park Slope: One resident, Mark Chalfin, bought a three-story home near Prospect Park for $125,000 in 1980.
In the past two years, homes on either side of him sold for around $4 million each. Now, his home has a market value of $4.63 million, but his property taxes remain at about $12,000 a year, in large part because annual increases are capped by law.
Homeowners like Mr. Chalfin could see stark increases in their property tax bills under the plan. Mayor de Blasio, who owns two homes worth at least $1 million in Park Slope, would also see a higher tax bill.
Luxury co-op and condo owners in Manhattan: Kenneth Griffin, the hedge fund billionaire, owns a $238 million condo in Manhattan. Under the current system, co-op and condo owners are not taxed at their true market value, but rather on the income generated by similar buildings.
Currently, Mr. Griffin’s property taxes are about $532,000. Under the new proposal, his tax bill would be about $3 million.
Out-of-town homeowners: “People who own a pied-à-terre in Manhattan will be paying more,” said James A. Parrott, director of economic and fiscal policies at the Center for New York City Affairs at the New School and a commission member.
How a Clash of Egos Became Bigger Than Fixing the Subway
Suicide at Hudson Yards Vessel: Teenager Jumps Over Railing
Coronavirus in New York: 2 More Possible Cases in City Are Identified
He Assaulted His Girlfriend. Now He Wants a Political Comeback.
Behind the Racial Uproar at One of the World’s Best Jazz Stations
Want more news? Check out our full coverage.
The Mini Crossword: Here is today’s puzzle.
A state bill banning New York police from using facial recognition technology is “insane,” said Bill Bratton, the city’s former police commissioner. [New York Post]
Somebody stole a spotted-pig figurine from outside the now-shuttered Spotted Pig restaurant. [Eater]
Staten Island Chuck predicted we’ll get an early spring. [SILive.com]
The artist Krzysztof Wodiczko discusses his installation “Monument,” on view in Madison Square Park, with the writer and critic Aruna D’Souza at Sony Square N.Y.C. in Manhattan. 6 p.m. [Free]
All skill levels are welcome at a three-hour figure-drawing session at the Old Stone House in Brooklyn. 7 p.m. [$12]
The historian and author Alexis Coe delves into her biography of George Washington, “You Never Forget Your First,” at Books Are Magic in Brooklyn. 7 p.m. [Free]
— Danya Issawi
Events are subject to change, so double-check before heading out. For more events, see the going-out guides from The Times’s culture pages.
Rachel Felder reports:
Studio Del was a boutique that the designer Del Pitt Feldman opened on East Seventh Street in 1965. Her crocheted garments — including open-weave vests, string bikinis, minidresses and capes — seemed to capture the freewheeling spirit of the neighborhood at the time.
Clientele at the store included Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, Grace Slick and Andy Warhol. Cher and Lily Tomlin also wore clothes designed by Ms. Feldman.
Ms. Feldman died on Jan. 14. She was 90.
Ms. Feldman’s designs helped make crochet a respected medium for fashion and art. By the early 1970s, her store had become a de facto clubhouse for a group of female artists who were working in that medium.
Ms. Feldman, who was older than those artists, called herself “the mother of the movement,” her daughter said.
Ms. Feldman was also an author. “Crochet: Discovery and Design,” published in 1972, was praised in The New York Times for going “beyond baby booties and into ideas that could turn into works of art.” A second book followed two years later.
Julie Schafler Dale, who in the early 1970s founded the influential Manhattan store Julie: Artisans’ Gallery, said Ms. Feldman’s shop had been “a magnet for these young women who were interested in using yarns to create innovative new forms and wearable pieces.”
It’s Monday — wear some art.
Dear Diary:
I was breaking up with my boyfriend.
I had shoved everything I needed into a rickety folding cart that I had wheeled into our building’s elevator when my ex came running down the hall. He held the doors open, arguing with me for a really long time.
I wasn’t the only one in the elevator. A man trapped in there with me politely pretended that a relationship wasn’t collapsing in front of him.
The doors finally closed and we went outside. I apologized. He pulled out two cigarettes, handed me one and stood next to me, smoking.
We didn’t speak or even look at each other. We just stood there shoulder to shoulder for a few minutes while I pulled myself together. Then he flicked his butt and walked away.
— Miranda McLeod
New York Today is published weekdays around 6 a.m. Sign up here to get it by email. You can also find it at nytoday.com.
We’re experimenting with the format of New York Today. What would you like to see more (or less) of? Post a comment or email us: nytoday@nytimes.com.