John Bolton’s Offer to Testify
To the Editor:
Re “Bolton, in Twist, Offers to Testify at Trump’s Trial” (front page, Jan. 7):
Is it a coincidence that John Bolton, immediately after the assassination of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, agreed to testify in the impeachment trial? It is reported that such testimony would be damning to the president, but is that necessarily so?
As we all know, Mr. Bolton has long advocated military action against Iran. Now that President Trump has initiated a direct attack, isn’t it more likely that Mr. Bolton would make every effort to defend him against removal?
Lawrence Kaplan
Ardsley, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Now that John Bolton, the former national security adviser, has announced that he will testify if subpoenaed by the Senate in its impeachment proceedings, it is up to Mitch McConnell to subpoena him. If Mr. McConnell decides he does not wish to hear what Mr. Bolton has to say, perhaps Mr. Bolton would agree to appear before the House of Representatives Intelligence Committee in a “Phase 2” of its impeachment inquiry?
Jennie Driesen
New York

To the Editor:
Re “Pentagon Rules Out Strikes on Antiquities” (front page, Jan. 7):
White House officials are tying themselves in knots trying to say that President Trump did not say he would consider attacking cultural sites in Iran. Even though he said it.
From George Orwell’s “1984”: “In the end the Party would announce that two and two made five, and you would have to believe it.”
Jane Warden
Malibu, Calif.
To the Editor:
Re “A Generation Familiar With War Confronts Fears of Another Conflict” (news article, Jan. 6):
I was 7 years old on Sept. 11, 2001. Unlike many of my generation, I remember my parents’ stories of the Vietnam War. In this context, the stories always carried a certain weight of immediacy and the possibility of repetition.
In one vivid tale, my mom recounted the story of a friend who was drafted on the cusp of his 26th birthday, leaving his wife and infant and returning in a flag-draped coffin. I am now 26 years old.
Young people are right to fear war. It touches young people and their families with devastating consequences. While I understand the desire of parents to ease their children’s fears, I also sense a false dichotomy: Either surrender to the hype or dismiss it entirely.
To forge a better future, I encourage these young people to instead master the skills that our leaders have not. Rather than letting the hype control our reaction, we must build true resilience, reason, courage and empathy to face circumstances beyond our control.
Michelle Bunch
Atlanta
To the Editor:
Re “Teaching an Old Frog New Tricks” (news article, Dec. 26):
It is true that certain hateful memes or labels may be deemed not hateful because of new uses or contexts, and that platforms should be careful in classifying content as hateful. But the vast preponderance of hate on the internet is immutable, consisting of racist, anti-Semitic, homophobic and other forms of online hate not subject to second-guessing.
A much greater concern than re-evaluating a small category of online content is the failure of internet platforms to do all they can to live up to their promises of a hate-free environment.
Christopher Wolf
Washington
The writer is the co-author of “Viral Hate: Containing Its Spread on the Internet.”
To the Editor:
Re “Eviction Crises That a Few Hundred Dollars Could Solve” (Business, Dec. 18):
While the holiday season brought tidings of joy for some, many people go through the cold winter months facing eviction and homelessness. Many are renters who are shut out of their homes over only a few hundred dollars, often less than one month’s rent.
In U.S. eviction cases, 90 percent of renters don’t have the means to access legal representation, while 90 percent of landlords do. To help curb this trend, we need to implement a big, but simple, solution nationwide: a tenant’s right to counsel. This would level the playing field for tenants facing eviction.
In cities with a right to counsel, like Philadelphia, lawyers help keep renters in their homes. They enter payment agreements with landlords. They negotiate to have repairs made, so tenants don’t have to withhold rent. By doing so, they prevent homelessness, saving cities millions of dollars in the cost of social services.
It’s time to promote fairness and adopt right to counsel nationwide.
Rachel Garland
Barrett Marshall
Philadelphia
Ms. Garland is the managing attorney of the Housing Unit at Community Legal Services of Philadelphia. Mx. Marshall is a staff attorney at Community Legal Services of Philadelphia and the director of the Philadelphia Eviction Prevention Project.