Giving Credit Where Credit Is Due
To the Editor:
I just wanted to drop a quick note to say that I really appreciated and enjoyed seeing the illustrations for this year’s Holiday Books issue. Very fun and festive!
Renee Bajek
Hickory Hills, Ill.
The art director replies:
Thank you! This is great to hear. The illustrator, Cari Vander Yacht, is an Oregon native who pivoted to her present career in New York after having worked as an art director in the Pacific Northwest. Her art jolts the 24-hour doom-and-gloom news cycle with humor and humanism.
She was recruited for this mammoth undertaking during the least wintry time of the year imaginable: July. We invited her to ruminate on the broader spirit of the season and waited to see how she would respond. Her cuckoo clock proposal was inspired, both for the scene and the tone it set for the whole issue, and also for how the individual components could then be explored in greater detail through the spots that ran with all of our holiday roundups inside.
Past experience suggests that when an artist produces work of that quality, which looks effortless, then it’s probably anything but. She gave the project everything she had and we’re grateful.
Matt Dorfman
To the Editor:
Charles McGrath’s review of Daisy Dunn’s “The Shadow of Vesuvius: A Life of Pliny” (Dec. 15) states that Pliny the Elder, who was in charge of the imperial fleet at Misenum, about 30 miles from the volcano, perished when he went to investigate the “strange cloud that had suddenly appeared on the horizon” and was “suffocated by falling ash and pumice.”
Pliny the Younger’s letter to Tacitus was written 25 years after the eruption and, as noted in the review, he was not with his uncle at the site. Pliny the Younger assumes his uncle died because of the eruption, but current thought on the subject is that Pliny the Elder probably died from a stroke or heart attack. Others were with him at the time; had he perished from contact with volcanic matter, those with him would also have died.
Pliny the Younger’s descriptions of the eruption are considered accurate even today, admirable praise since the Romans had little knowledge of volcanism. However, his dating of the event is questioned because excavations at the site show evidence of the harvest having passed; recent discoveries have provided more evidence that the event occurred in October or November of A.D. 79 rather than in August.
J.M. Tribelli
Dover, N.J.