Richard Plepler and Josh Tyrangiel May Revive Their HBO Act for Apple
Richard Plepler is closing in on a deal with a former Vice Media executive, Josh Tyrangiel, to join his new production company, Eden Studios, according to two people with knowledge of discussions.
Mr. Plepler, the former chief executive of HBO, signed a five-year deal late last year to make series, documentaries and feature films exclusively for Apple TV Plus, the streaming platform that started in November. Mr. Tyrangiel is likely to focus on documentaries and current-events programming if a deal is reached, the people said.
“I like to think that I’m a pretty good assembler of talent,” Mr. Plepler told The New York Times in a recent interview, after he signed the Apple deal. “And nobody gets any project off the ground without an enormous variety of talented people working with them. I expect to do more of that in my little new venture.”
The relationship between Mr. Tyrangiel and Mr. Plepler goes back several years. Mr. Tyrangiel was the executive in charge of “Vice News Tonight,” the nightly newscast that joined HBO’s programming slate in 2016.
The show was canceled last year, a few months after Mr. Plepler left the network. On the same day that HBO announced the cancellation, Mr. Tyrangiel said he was departing Vice Media.
Before joining Vice, Mr. Tyrangiel was the top editor of Bloomberg Businessweek. The Wall Street Journal first reported on the negotiations between Mr. Tyrangiel and Mr. Plepler.
Apple is well on its way to making documentaries for its new streaming service. At the Sundance Film Festival this week, the company bought the rights to “Boys State,” a documentary by Jesse Moss and Amanda McBaine from Concordia Studio, a new production company backed by Laurene Powell Jobs.
Apple plans to release another half-dozen documentaries this year, including “Beastie Boys Story,” “Visible: Out on Television,” a documentary about the singer Billie Eilish, and “Home,” a series about lavish houses.
Zack Van Amburg and Jamie Erlich, the heads of Apple TV Plus, hired Molly Thompson, the former head of A&E Indie Films, to lead its documentary division last year.
Apple TV Plus has not disclosed viewership statistics for its programs but the company’s chief executive, Tim Cook, told investors this week that the streaming service was off to a “rousing start.”