Water Break on Upper West Side Disrupts Subway Service
A water main break, the second in one week, flooded a New York City subway station and suspended service on several lines on Sunday morning.
The flooding caused subway service to be suspended on the A, C and D lines between 125th and 59th Streets, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said on Twitter.  The 103rd Street station near Central Park was flooded.
By the early afternoon, the lines were running again, with delays in both directions, the authority said on Twitter.
The break occurred at 102nd Street and Central Park West, prompting both northbound and southbound lane closures of Central Park West from 97th Street to 102nd Street, the police said on Twitter.
The cause of the break was unclear. The authority said on Twitter that it was outside of its system and near the street level. The subways were suspended after water rose more than a foot above the rails.
New York City Transit crews were alerted around 7:50 a.m. that a city-owned water main erupted, said Sally Librera, senior vice president of subways for New York City Transit.
The water main was shut off by the city Department of Environmental Protection around 9 a.m., she said. A department representative could not be immediately reached.
“New York City Transit rapidly responded by deploying resources in the Infrastructure, Track and Signals Departments, as well as pumping equipment and supplies to the scene,” Ms. Librera said.
Signal equipment, a power substation and third rail cables were being inspected.
Commuters had a difficult time navigating the disruptions as trains were delayed, streets were blocked and larger crowds than usual waited for buses.
Lydia Kalmen, who lives in Washington Heights, said she was trying to get downtown to teach Sunday school but couldn’t find a train or bus to get there.
The No. 1 subway line was inaccessible because of track maintenance, so she walked to the C train but was told service there was affected by the water main break. She tried to get a free shuttle bus but said there was a huge crowd — with some people waiting for nearly 30 minutes — and no bus in sight.
“I didn’t have time to wait who knows how long for the free shuttle bus,” she said, adding that she had to spend money on a cab “that I really can’t afford right now.”
On Monday, another water main break on the Upper West Side flooded streets between Broadway and Columbus Avenue from West 61st to West 65th Streets. For hours, subway service was disrupted on the No. 1, 2 and 3 lines and several bus routes were detoured.
New York City has about 6,800 miles of water mains that carry more than a billion gallons of water to residents and businesses every day. In the past five fiscal years, the city recorded an average of 474 breaks a year, according to the Mayor’s Management Report, which assesses city services.
The city has one of the oldest networks of underground infrastructure in the world, and aging pipes and utilities are particularly susceptible to leaks, breaks and cracks.
Speaking of the water main break on Sunday, Ms. Librera said: “This is the second time this week our customers have been denied service for too lengthy a period because of a major city water main break that flooded our system. We hope this latest incident will spur quicker shut-off response times by the city and a review of its aging system in hopes of avoiding similar situations moving forward.”