Examining the Christian Idea of Hell
To the Editor:
Re “Why Do People Believe in Hell?” (Op-Ed, Jan. 11):
For David Bentley Hart, hell is God’s eternal torture chamber that served as a method of control for less enlightened peoples and remains a source of perverse satisfaction to the obstinately religious. Here’s another idea: Hell is what there is without God.
The radical proposal of Christianity is that perhaps none of us need go there, however evil we have been, because redemption is on offer. Dr. Hart’s sunny universalism suggests that nothing is really evil and it’s just not nice to call a spade a spade.
It is worth pointing out that in our present cultural moment, redemption is no longer on offer, even for the living, as a single misstep or divergent thought will be punished by total and permanent exclusion.
Our post-religious society may not believe in hell, but it has also forgotten forgiveness.
Alison Cornish
New York
The writer is a professor of Italian studies at New York University.
To the Editor:
This provocative article targets the dilemma of the human spirit: Why do we encourage and hope for the downfall of those with whom we disagree? Is this the only form of self-confirmation that renders satisfaction?
I plan to offer this topic to my philosophy discussion group. We must expose our darkest inclinations to bring about new levels of understanding.
Anne Ferber
Lewes, Del.
To the Editor:
Hell, a fiery domain of eternal damnation, is burned into the psyche of evangelical and other Christians from their very youth. Yet this image of perpetual suffering and hopeless finality fails to reconcile with the infinitely merciful deity manifested in the life and teachings of Jesus Christ.
It is ironic that fire, often considered a purifying agent, would be the element of everlasting affliction in hell. Could one not rather conceive of hell as a way station of refinement and purification for those transitioning to paradise?
Robert Judkins
Hendersonville, Tenn.
To the Editor:
David Bentley Hart rightly says the biblical support for conscious eternal torment is scant. But it is quite clear that there is a separation, some to eternal life with God and some not so much. Those souls may not “rot in hell,” but neither do they enjoy eternal life.
Dr. Hart would have done well to stick to the issue of hell and not try to bundle with it the huge separate question of universal salvation.
Andy Saylor
Paxtang, Pa.
To the Editor:
I remember well a lecture on hell delivered by Cardinal Avery Dulles, a Jesuit at Fordham University, in 2003. He argued that there were three things that a Christian should believe about hell.
One, that there is a hell, because human freedom can definitively choose evil. Two, we don’t know as a matter of fact if anyone is in hell. It could be empty. This because of God’s mercy.
Three, I could very well end up in hell. This because I know intimately my own wickedness.
This made sense to me then and still does.
Jeffrey von Arx
Cambridge, Mass.
The writer, a Jesuit priest, is a visiting professor of the history of Christianity at Boston College.
To the Editor:
In explaining the tenacity of the Christian belief in eternal damnation, David Bentley Hart makes the excellent point that the belief bolsters the sense of reward for those who see themselves as heaven bound. He frames their thinking in the question, “What heaven can there be for us without an eternity in which to relish the impotent envy of those outside its walls?”
As a Christian who long ago dismissed the idea of eternal damnation, I have often noticed another side to the belief. Some Christians seem far more concerned with who is not saved than the fact that they themselves are. It seems that such believers are counting upon their God both to carry out their revenge for them and to insulate them from those who are different or who make them personally uncomfortable.
Heaven is, then, to be an exclusive club reserved only for Christians just like them. Sadly, their God, rather than being loving and merciful, is small, stingy and petty.
Anne-Marie Hislop
Chicago
The writer is a Presbyterian minister.