Cramped Spot
MONDAY PUZZLE — You know what might be proof that magic is real? Your email’s “send” button. All you have to do is write a long, whiny email to a constructor or the puzzle editors to ask what they mean by something in a crossword, and just before you hit that “send” button, the answer to your question pops right into your brain. It almost never fails.
I bring this up because while I solved Alan Arbesfeld’s puzzle, and while I understood the theme and could find the words that the revealer hinted at, I wasn’t sure why they were necessarily “cramped.”
And then, as they say, it hit me. With my finger poised right over the “send” button.
Boy, was I off course. And on a Monday!
This puzzle felt harder to me than the average Monday crossword. I don’t like to say that, because “day of week” assignments are an art and not a science, but there was some tough stuff in this puzzle. OCTANT and the former baseball player Robb NEN were unknown to me, although I got them from the crossings. Some of the fill might leave solvers scratching their heads, like EELER, and some might be beyond the ken of younger solvers, like newsman Robert MACNEIL, who returns to the New York Times Crossword after a hiatus of 33 years (Hi, kids!).
Anyway:
1A. I had TASTY before MEATY, but if something (other than actual meat) is something that people can “sink their teeth into,” they refer to it as MEATY.
20A. A play on “catching rays,” someone catching moray eels is an EELER.
32A. Fun fact: Moo goo GAI pan is an Americanized version of a Cantonese dish that probably has humble origins because of its simplicity. It translates to “Stir-fried chicken with mushrooms.”
68A. Sadly, the dairy company Borden filed for bankruptcy protection recently, so ELSIE the cow will have to live elsewhere.
5D. I have only seen YAWL once before in a crossword, about five years ago. It’s a two-masted sailing vessel. I would call it a boat, but I still have the scars from when I mistakenly called the Queen Mary 2 a “boat” on the 2017 Times Journeys crossing. (Also, don’t call it a “cruise.” It’s amazing what you learn on these things.)
Speaking of crossings, I’ll be sailing for England once again in July with a small group of very interesting colleagues, and it would be ever-so-spiffy if you came with.
13D. I’m more of an “Anyway!” seguer, but some storytellers might use SO THEN.
46D. O.K., I giggled at this one. PILOTS do, indeed, find their prospects “up in the air.”
47D. Remember the consistency rule in crossword solving: If the clue is in another language besides English, the answer has to be in that language as well. So the “Home of Milano [Not the cookie — D.A.] and Firenze” is ITALIA, not Italy.
58D. “Pedal pushers” were the 1950s and ’60s predecessors to capri pants or other calf-length leggings, but this clue is wordplay. You also push pedals with your FEET.
65D. “Wimbledon service?” is another great clue. Since Wimbledon is where the famous tennis tournament is held, it makes sense that this clue might be about tennis. But watch that question mark. Another kind of service, especially one that might be offered in Britain, is a TEA service.
So how did I get so flummoxed on this theme? I conflated the revealer clue with the answer, that’s what I did. It happens. Even on a Monday.
The revealer clue is “Cramped spot for an plane passenger … or a hint to something hidden in 17-, 26-, 34-, 42- and 51-Across,” and the answer is MIDDLE SEAT (Been there, done that, always ask for the aisle seat now). It turns out that there are SEATs in the MIDDLE (sort of) of each of the five theme entries. For example, there is a PEW inside the entry PIPE WRENCH at 17A.
Is it “cramped”? Well, that depends on the sermon I guess, but my point is that it is a SEAT in the “MIDDLE” of PIPE WRENCH and that’s it. Don’t overthink it like I did.
Want to take a SEAT but can’t find them? Click on any of the theme clues below for help.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
Your thoughts?