A School Where the Student Body Is Obsessed With Student Bodies
OLIGARCHY
By Scarlett Thomas
Fat is fat, to the boarding-school girls in the English writer Scarlett Thomas’s new novel, but fat is also a flag of pathos and victimhood.
The privileged teenage girls in “Oligarchy,” attending a dysfunctional, third-string boarding school in the countryside north of London, get caught up in a mass-psychogenic, contagious version of anorexia nervosa. For the girls — mostly pretty smart, though also profoundly and willfully superficial — fat people are to be pitied, obviously, but empathized with, too. Since all of us, as the girls understand it, hover precariously and constantly on the brink of potential fatness. When Tash, the main character, sees fat people in church, she prays for the fat to be lifted off them.
In “Oligarchy” it’s almost as though the flab that comes to rest on bodies, permitted to settle there only because weak minds are powerless against it, possesses independent life and will. In fact these young women — including Tash, whose father is a rich Russian criminal; the enigmatic and skeletal Bianca; and Rachel, who at first is fat herself (a.k.a. normal weight) — are so captivated by the specter of excess flesh that it functions as an antihero.
Fat is a socioeconomic marker as well as a symptom of vulnerability, of course. Often it claims working-class people as its victims, examples of whom the girls occasionally spot in the nearby town of Stevenage. In one scene they ask their favorite teacher, a depressed and bearded Marxist existentialist, about the townies walking past them on a village field trip:
“Oh my God, sir, it’s full of plebs!”
“We don’t use that word, Rachel. That’s five house points you’ve just lost.” …
“And so many fat people. Why are they all so fat, sir?”
“Because of capitalism, Lissa.”
Thomas’s humor has a sharp, rhythmic perfection. Her prose is fast-thinking, entertaining and punchy, her dialogue fully authentic without sinking into the tedium of real-life conversation.
“Oligarchy” is a study in obsessiveness pinned to a vague, whodunit structure we don’t really need, with a couple of barely felt deaths thrown in. But in Thomas’s hands we don’t care: If the back story has the quality of a flippant gesture, frankly, what of it? In the best fiction, plot is strictly nonmandatory. We shift and slide among perspectives, from omniscience to Tash and Bianca and Rachel and even some ancient, half-fossilized teachers, and hardly notice the sequence of events. Intriguing, fluid and frequently funny interior monologues are what Thomas does best.
No one here is an angel, except on the surface: The girls are as flawed as any of us. But they’re also formidable. Tash is a survivor, while at least one of her friends ends up dead, but dead or alive, all the girls in the novel are strong — when they want something, they usually get it.
They easily manipulate most of their teachers, for example, persuading one of them to let them take their backpacks shopping so they’ll be able to hide the booze and cigarettes they buy:
“Miss Annabel has already eyed the rucksacks suspiciously but been told firmly that this is for the environment, because doesn’t she understand that we don’t have a Planet B? Doesn’t she know how many turtles have to be killed to produce one plastic bag?”
It would be glib to fail to mention the sadness hidden in the folds of this novel’s dark playfulness — particularly the sadness of its protagonists’ relentless self-objectification. These Gen Z girls may not care much about men or the so-called male gaze, but as it turns out, that doesn’t set them free. Their own gaze is brutal enough.