What to Cook This Weekend
Good morning. Here’s what you ought to do tonight, before dinner: Set up the chicken and marinade for Melissa Clark’s Peruvian roasted chicken with spicy cilantro sauce, so you can make and eat it in a frenzy on Saturday night, with purple potatoes tossed in oil and oregano, salt and pepper, then cooked crisp on a tray below the bird. It’s a revelation, that meal. You’ll be tweaking it for the rest of the winter, before spring comes and you start working on your rotisserie game.
For dinner tonight, I like a ton of mushrooms steamed in foil, with a couple tablespoons of butter and a splash of soy sauce, to eat over short-grained rice. In a hot oven, a pound ought to be done in around 20 or 25 minutes. Add a little miso, and it’ll be like a taste of the forest. If you can lay your hands on some tricked-out miso like the amazing one my sister-in-law gave me from Go-En Fermented Foods, with porcini mushrooms and fir tips, it’ll be even better, like a taste of a magical forest.
Cook a lot on Saturday, in advance of your roast chicken. Lay in some stews and soups to make next week’s dinners as simple as reheating a big pot: this phenomenal Dijon and cognac beef stew (above), for instance; or this curried shrimp and crab gumbo, which only improves after a night or two in the refrigerator. (No more than that, please!)
You could bake a sour cream coffee cake for breakfast on Sunday. Or revitalize your sourdough starter, using the excess for pancakes or waffles. You could take all that venison backstrap that a neighbor gave you and you’ve had in the freezer since Christmas, and cut it into cubes for spiedies to cure in their marinade until Wednesday or Thursday, then cook under the broiler. (You could do that with rump steak, or pork shoulder, if you prefer.)
Set up a few hot dishes for the freezer? I like this eggplant casserole from the chef Donald Link in New Orleans. Also this leek and mushroom cottage pie, from our David Tanis. Or maybe just make a bunch of soup? Tamar Adler’s health soup, for instance?
You can find your own inspiration at NYT Cooking, though you will need a subscription to access the site and all its recipes and cooking guides. You get that, right? Your subscriptions allow us to do this work, and do it well. We’re so thankful for them — and for you.
Like many, we have a complicated relationship with social media. But there we are on Facebook, along with a group of fellow subscribers who are very nice. And here we are on Instagram. Yes, we’re on Twitter, as well. We even have our own YouTube channel, where I think you’ll have a very nice time.
But if not, or if you run into trouble with your cooking or our technology, please write to let us know: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Someone will get back to you, I promise.
Now, it’s nothing at all to do with cumin or treacle, but I’m just catching up with John Le Carré’s “Agent Running in the Field.” Maybe you could join me?
You should absolutely read Lolis Eric Elie on the remarkable life of Leah Chase, in The Los Angeles Times.
Kind of stoked for Katrine Engberg’s latest, “The Tenant.”
Finally, I started the week toasting the schooner Mary E., built in Bath, Maine, in 1906. The jazz vibraphonist Teddy Charles was her captain for many years out of Greenport, N.Y., and Key West, Fla. Let’s run into the weekend with him playing “You Go to My Head,” from the 1956 album “The Teddy Charles Tentet.” And as the wags say, I’ll see you on Sunday.