Why Are So Many Earthquakes Happening in Puerto Rico?
Puerto Rico has been trembling for more than a week.
A magnitude-5.9 earthquake struck the island on Saturday, rattling residents who were already reeling from a 6.4-magnitude earthquake off the coast on Tuesday.
Saturday’s quake came after days of powerful tremors, including ones with estimates of 5.6, 5.2, 4.5 and 5.8 magnitude. The 5.8 quake leveled homes on Monday, and there were dozens of smaller earthquakes on Tuesday within a few miles along the southwestern coast of the island, according to the United States Geological Survey. The temblors knocked out power to much of the island, seriously damaging homes and buildings and leaving at least one person dead.
“Things are really very tense about what has been going on because this is not normal — so many tremors,” Mayor Nelson Torres Yordán of Guayanilla said this week.
The Geological Survey said that residents should be ready for more aftershocks in the coming days. The island is almost certain to have dozens more quakes of magnitude 3 or higher, and there is a 63 percent chance of an earthquake of magnitude of 5 or higher.
At about three times the size of Rhode Island, Puerto Rico is squeezed between the border of the North American and Caribbean tectonic plates.
The Puerto Rico Trench, north of Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands, is an undersea fault zone. The North American plate is sliding under the Caribbean plate there, creating the potential for earthquakes and undersea landslides that can set off tsunamis.
“We’re just as likely to have earthquakes as a place like California, Japan, New Zealand, Alaska,” said Elizabeth Vanacore, a seismologist with the Puerto Rico Seismic Network.
When the tectonic plates in the region slide past each other and squeeze together, energy and stress build up until one side of a fault pops up, unleashing an earthquake. The earthquakes redistribute stresses along the fault for a time, until those stresses build up again and new tremors occur.
The North American plate is edging south and sinking underneath the Caribbean plate at about 2 centimeters per year, according to Gavin Hayes, a research geophysicist at the United States Geological Survey. To the south, the Caribbean plate is moving in the opposite direction, northward, at a similar rate.
“They are converging at a relatively low rate in comparison to plate boundaries around the world,” he said. In South America, it can be as high as 6 centimeters per year, while in the southwest Pacific it is up to 10 centimeters per year. Slower convergence rates mean strain builds up more slowly, making earthquakes either smaller or more rare, he said.
Mayita Meléndez, mayor of Ponce, said people living near beaches are desperate to get out of their homes for fear of tsunamis. “It’s not safe,” Ms. Meléndez said. “The earth is moving constantly.”
Early Tuesday morning, the United States National Tsunami Warning Center said there was no tsunami threat from that morning’s earthquake. The local authorities initially issued a tsunami watch before canceling it, according to Puerto Rico’s emergency management agency.
A tsunami happens when a quake on the seabed suddenly pushes water upward, producing a perilously towering wave. In 1918, an earthquake near the island’s northwestern coast triggered a tsunami that killed 118 people, according to the geological service.
Puerto Rico has seen damaging quakes before, but major earthquakes in the southwestern part of the island are unusual in recent history.
The last significant temblors recorded in that area, in 1991 and 1999, had a magnitude of about 4.1, according to the Puerto Rico Seismic Network, whose data dates to 1986.
Most of the seismic activity has occurred in the underwater band to the north of the island, close to where the tectonic plate boundary is. The geological survey has recorded 61 earthquakes of 4.5 magnitude or within about 50 miles of the northern shoreline since 2009.
Major earthquakes have regularly devastated cities in the Caribbean, including Kingston, the capital of Jamaica, which was destroyed twice in three centuries. Ten years ago, a 7.0-magnitude earthquake struck Haiti on Jan. 12, killing more than 200,000 people and destroying tens of thousands of buildings.
“Puerto Ricans should be aware that they live in a tectonically active region,” Mr. Hayes said. “Earthquakes can be expected any time.” He emphasized the importance of building to seismic codes.
Seismologists said that more earthquakes are expected to be felt on the island in the next few days because the seismic activity is occurring close to land. But the frequency of aftershocks is expected to slow down over time, which means the chances of another intense earthquake will also fall.
Arrivals and departures at the international airport in San Juan, which was running on generators, were operating on or close to schedule Tuesday morning.