What’s on TV Saturday: ‘John Wick: Chapter 3’ and ‘Austin City Limits’
JOHN WICK: CHAPTER 3 — PARABELLUM (2019) 8 p.m. on HBO; stream on HBO platforms. At just over two hours, this over-the-top action flick is propelled forward mostly by a series of impeccably choreographed fight scenes. It is the third installment in the “John Wick” franchise by the returning director Chad Stahelski, and it picks up where the second film left off. John (Keanu Reeves) has been excommunicated from the High Table, the global society of villains to which he once belonged, and has a multimillion-dollar bounty on his head. Suddenly there’s a killer on every corner. Knowing he’s outnumbered, John heads to Morocco in hopes of revoking his death sentence. Along the way he seeks help from his former mentor (Anjelica Huston) and a friend from his past (Halle Berry), who has a couple of merciless dogs trained for combat. Writing in The New York Times, Jeannette Catsoulis said that the movie’s endless cycle of violence can become deadening, but its elaborate thrills give it its edge.
LOVE IN WINTERLAND (2020) 9 p.m. on Hallmark. This new romantic drama stars Italia Ricci as Alice, a finalist on a dating show in Los Angeles. During the last round of dates, the show’s bachelor, Tanner (Jack Turner), invites Alice on a trip to her scenic Vermont hometown. There, she bumps into her high school sweetheart, Brett (Chad Michael Murray), who just happens to own the inn where the show’s cast and crew are staying, and their reunion rekindles strong feelings.
AUSTIN CITY LIMITS 11 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). After an 11-year hiatus, Jack White’s the Raconteurs returned last summer with a third album, “Help Us Stranger.” It’s as if they never left. The singles “Sunday Driver” and “Now That You’re Gone,” one, a classic rock ’n’ roll hit, the other, a bluesy tune about a love lost, fit well into their previous records. The four-piece performs their new songs in this live performance, joined by the Austin-based funk duo Black Pumas.
CATCH ME IF YOU CAN (2002) Stream on Netflix; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu or YouTube. Leonardo DiCaprio and Tom Hanks walked away from the Golden Globes empty-handed last week. But the actors may have a shot at Oscar nominations, to be announced Monday. For a look at their earlier work, revisit this riveting crime caper by Steven Spielberg, based on the autobiography of the real-life impostor Frank W. Abagnale Jr. (DiCaprio). Upset by his parents’ divorce and his father’s troubles with the I.R.S., Frank runs away from home. He manages to steal millions of dollars before turning 19 by forging checks and posing as a pilot, a doctor and a lawyer. His schemes take him all over the world, with a seasoned F.B.I. agent (Hanks) right on his tail. Writing in The Times, Stephen Holden called DiCaprio’s performance “sensational.”