Sheryl Sandberg Is Engaged to Tom Bernthal
Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, announced her engagement to Tom Bernthal, the founder of a Los Angeles-based strategic consulting agency, on Monday.
“Engaged!!! Tom Bernthal, you are my everything. I could not love you more,” Ms. Sandberg, 50, said in a Facebook post.
Mr. Bernthal replied in a comment: “Sheryl Sandberg, I love you so much and couldn’t be more excited about spending the rest of our lives together.”
The couple, set up by Ms. Sandberg’s former brother-in-law, were engaged over the weekend, People reported. Ms. Sandberg has two children, and Mr. Bernthal has three.
Mr. Bernthal, 46, is the founder and chief executive of Kelton Global, a global marketing research and brand consulting agency.
On Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, responded to Ms. Sandberg’s post: “Congrats! You’re wonderful for each other and I’m so happy for both of you.”
A spokeswoman for Ms. Sandberg, Caroline Nolan, said that Ms. Sandberg and Mr. Bernthal weren’t currently doing interviews.
The engagement comes nearly five years after the death of Ms. Sandberg’s husband, Dave Goldberg, the chief executive of SurveyMonkey. He died after he collapsed at a gym while the couple were on holiday in 2015, leaving her with two young children.
In the following months, Ms. Sandberg spoke publicly about her grief and later published a book in 2017 about resilience, “Option B: Facing Adversity, Building Resilience, and Finding Joy.”
“Self-compassion is how we recover,” Ms. Sandberg told The New York Times in 2017. “And not just for the things that aren’t our fault.”
A former Clinton administration official and veteran tech executive, Ms. Sandberg has been in the public eye as she led Google’s early ad sales efforts and later built Facebook into a booming business. She published “Lean In,” a best-selling book about women in the workplace, in 2013.
During Ms. Sandberg’s tenure at Facebook, the company has faced years of scrutiny over how it handles user data. In 2018, Ms. Sandberg testified at a Senate hearing to discuss the company’s response to foreign interference in elections and the moderation of online content.
Before Kelton Global, Mr. Bernthal worked in the Clinton White House and for NBC News, where he was an Emmy Award-winning television producer. Mr. Bernthal is a brother of Jon Bernthal, the actor who played the Punisher in Netflix’s “Daredevil” series and Shane Walsh in the series “The Walking Dead.”