Jonas Mekas’s Debut Is an Artifact of Beat-Era New York
The threatening atom bomb casts a baleful shadow over the serious young people who inhabit “Guns of the Trees,” the first feature made by the hugely influential filmmaker and activist Jonas Mekas. Shot in and around New York in the early 1960s, the 75-minute, black-and-white movie projects a sense of beatnik doom as evocative as it is dated.
In notes distributed at the movie’s premiere, Mekas, who died last year at 96, called it his “meditation on love and death in a period of darkness,” and “Guns” is a period piece. That it is showing, at Anthology Film Archives in Manhattan through Jan. 29, in a 35-millimeter restoration print made from the original negative, burnishes its anachronistic quality.
When “Guns” opened commercially in February 1964, two-and-a-half years after its first screenings, The New York Times critic Eugene Archer cautiously noted that the movie “has been sparking controversies among observers of its genre at private screenings here and abroad” and called it “one of the farthest out of far-out films.”
Essentially, the movie concerns two couples. One pair Barbara and Gregory (Frances Stillman and the filmmaker’s brother Adolfas Mekas) is white and gloomy. The other Argus and Ben (named for their actors, Argus Spear Juillard and Ben Carruthers, a principal in John Cassavetes’s “Shadows”) is black and life-affirming.
Argus is happily pregnant. Barbara has committed suicide, and thus the movie is largely a flashback. Militantly sullen, Barbara rails against the ugliness of the world and the spirit of autumn while her lover, the black-clad Gregory, tries to figure the meaning of existence. Meanwhile Argus and Ben frisk through various locations and make love in what looks like a cold-water loft.
The action is punctuated with blasts of high-frequency noise and white light and underscored by Allen Ginsberg reciting “Sunflower Sutra” and intermittent folk songs provided by Sara Wiley, Caither Wiley, and Tom Sankey (who three years later composed the pioneering Off Off Broadway folk-rock musical “The Golden Screw”). To add to the existential drama, two satirical mimes occasionally appear, and a monk (Frank Kuenstler) wanders through the proceedings searching for his lost faith.
Even Ben has a crisis, ranting about strontium 90 in the rain and Caryl Chessman in the gas chamber. And he exclaims, “Nixon (Nixon!) running for president.” While these topical references might require footnotes, the interpolated footage of peace marches, the lashing the city received from Hurricane Donna and the so-called beatnik riot of April 1961, when folk singers battled police in Washington Square, speak for themselves. The shots of despoiled industrial landscapes in and around New York are mutely eloquent.
Mekas never made another dramatic movie, yet “Guns of the Trees” was key to his development as a filmmaker. It anticipates his diary films in its use of a poetic voice-over, focus on the artist’s friends and interest in recording their scene. Indeed, while the movie’s over-articulated angst may be tiresome, one need only look through the two-dimensional drama to see a raw and heartfelt document, a homage to a sooty, ungentrified New York and the hard rain falling on its earnest bohemian inhabitants.