Astros Fire Two, but That Won’t Clean Out Baseball’s Den of Thieves
The Houston Astros have offered us all a lesson this week in legal and illegal baseball, and the oh-so-thin membrane between the two.
An Astros hitter can line a hit and motor into second base. From that perch he can stare at the opposing catcher and set to stealing pitching signs. Then he can break dance or do jumping jacks or anything else he can contrive to let the batter know the identity of the next pitch.
That is baseball legal, and worth a giggle.
By contrast, a team apparatchik can sit in an airless office and stare at the television screen and decipher those same pitching signs. He can relay his findings to the bench, where players proceed with yips and howls and thumping of garbage cans to communicate to their batter that a fastball is a-coming.
That is baseball illegal, and a high crime.
On Monday, we learned the Astros committed many high crimes during the 2017 and 2018 seasons. Infamy was instantaneous. Major League Baseball released a blistering report, and the Astros owner Jim Crane fired his general manager, Jeff Luhnow, and his field manager, A.J. Hinch, less than an hour after baseball’s commissioner had suspended them for a year. The team was stripped of top draft picks and will pay a large fine. In one afternoon, the Astros went from colorfully outfitted darlings who played in the World Series last autumn to cheats living in shadowed ignominy.
I balk at playing defense lawyer, as my clients are not invariably appetizing. Luhnow, in particular, tended to groove on arrogance; he was the sort of cat who could tip his old employer, McKinsey & Company, to just how difficult it was for a clever fellow like him in this primitive industry. “You’ve got 150 people working in baseball operations, 200 players in a system, some of them have no high school education, some don’t speak English,” he explained to McKinsey in an interview in 2018. “You’re dealing with a very difficult population to implement new things that are not normal to them.”
Luhnow offered this lament even as the Astros were filching pitching signs like itchy-fingered bank robbers.
Hinch seemed a better-balanced man, but he can lay no claim to plausible surprise. Late in the 2017 season, Robert Manfred, the league commissioner, caught the Red Sox and the Yankees stealing signals, and he levied fines and made it clear he had grown weary of high-tech thievery. The Astros paid no heed, and so we now devote ourselves to damn, denounce and deprecate.
First, though, let’s note countervailing facts. Stealing signs is an ancient art. A New York Giant named Bobby Thomson hit a famous home run to give the Giants a win over the Brooklyn Dodgers in the third game of a three-game playoff in 1951, a shot that broke hearts and lifted spirits and that lives on in music and literature.
As The Wall Street Journal reported five decades later, it turned out that Giants Manager Leo Durocher, who is known for the famous sports quotation “Nice guys finish last,” had installed a coach far in the manager’s office in center field and handed him binoculars. When he had decoded the pitching signs, he put his thumb on a buzzer that sounded in the Giants’ bullpen, and players there signaled the hitter. Perhaps Thomson’s homer was a pickpocket’s reward.
Just last summer, the Mets’ manager, Mickey Callaway, and his bench coach, Jim Riggleman, leveled an accusation at the Los Angeles Dodgers, who lost the 2017 World Series to the Astros. “I think they have a system that helps them get signals and stuff,” Riggleman told reporters in May. There was no proof, but then again there rarely is.
Let’s move beyond mere pilferage. Tony La Russa presided as manager over the birth of the sluggo steroids era in Oakland and then served as manager at its apogee in St. Louis, when Mark McGwire made like Popeye and swatted home runs toward the Mississippi.
Through it all, La Russa waved off any suggestion that his sluggers were doping, and he was later admitted to the Baseball Hall of Fame.
A scandal that leads players to inject illegal steroids to compete with absurdly muscled competitors is worse than banging like a banshee on a garbage can in hopes you can communicate to a hitter that a 93 miles-per-hour slider will arrive in the next 1.1 seconds. Professional athletes are stunning creatures, though, and so I would not rule out that such information might confer an edge.
A quick scan of statistics offers no damning revelation.
In 2017, the Astros hit .279 at home with 115 home runs and a .472 slugging average. On the road, where a pitch-stealing scam was more difficult to pull off, the Astros hit .284 with 123 home runs and a .483 slugging average. That was not a one-off. In 2018, the Astros hit .248 at home with 92 home runs; on the road, the Astros hit .262 with 113 home runs.
I was more intrigued on Monday by Manfred’s logic in meting out punishment. He found that Hinch knew cheating was afoot and that although Hinch disliked it, he did not stamp it out. Hinch was the dugout boss, Manfred reasoned, and so he deserved a yearlong suspension. Crane, the Astros owner, fired him instead.
As for Luhnow, Manfred noted the great innovator “adamantly” denied knowing anything about the sophisticated theft operation. But “documentary” evidence, Manfred said, gave lie to his protestations.
He, too, was suspended for a year by M.L.B. — and then fired by the Astros.
That brings us to Crane, who has had his own troubles. In 2000, long before he purchased the Astros, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission found that his company tried to avoid hiring and promoting black and Latino employees. “Once you hire blacks,” Crane was accused of saying, “you can never fire them.”
Crane is the Astros’ boss of bosses. He was presumably aware of the loud rumors that his team had made a science of plundering pitching signals. Manfred, however, showed solicitude for a man who, by the by, was one of his bosses.
Crane, Manfred said, was “extraordinarily troubled and upset by the conduct of members of his organization.” He was aware of nothing.
Manfred’s care in establishing Crane’s ignorance was touching. I was more struck by something else Luhnow told McKinsey in that 2018 interview. “As our people see that the decisions that the organization did make was actually better than the decision they would’ve made had they been in charge,” he boasted, “that’s when you start to build up confidence.”
It’s a fair guess organizational confidence is at a low just about now.