Why We Need the Equal Rights Amendment
To the Editor:
Re “The Equal Rights Amendment Isn’t the Answer” (Sunday Review, Jan. 19):
Joan C. Williams isn’t asking the right questions when she wonders if continuing the effort to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment is a political battle worth waging. Ratifying the amendment isn’t about politics; it’s about the law and about basic human rights.
Because the Constitution does not mention women, women can go unseen by our judicial system. For example, a 2000 ruling by the Supreme Court struck down a provision of the Violence Against Women Act that allows survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault to sue their attackers in federal court.
Laws like the Equal Pay Act are not protected by the Constitution and can be repealed or rescinded at any time based on political whims. Title IX is already being eroded by the Trump administration.
When the E.R.A. was introduced in Congress in the 1970s, Phyllis Schlafly gave out fresh-baked bread and apple pie to state lawmakers to symbolize the supposed threat it posed to the American way.
Ms. Williams asserts that the perspective of so-called values voters is still pervasive. But more than 90 percent of the public supports the Equal Rights Amendment. The country has moved on from these unfounded fears.
A mass mobilization of activist women is demanding that the Equal Rights Amendment finally be enshrined in the Constitution. It’s not “all men” who are created equal but all women and men. The amendment is needed to correct the record.
Toni Van Pelt
Silver Spring, Md.
The writer is president of the National Organization for Women.
To the Editor:
Re “The Campus ‘Techlash’” (Sunday Styles, Jan. 12):
I’m glad that college students, worried about “selling out” to Big Tech, are weighing ethical concerns over monetary ones as they consider job prospects. But the students you profile are from Stanford, Brown, Penn and Yale — a very privileged sector of, in your words, “job seekers who can afford to be choosy.”
Many college students, including the ones I teach, are talented and equally civic-minded, but they do not have the option to air their grievances or write protest emails, much less to question prospective employers about their ethical practices as they interview for jobs. Most are too concerned about paying off their strangling college debt to take such risks.
Yet I have no doubt that many of my students, too, will do their best to use their technical skills to help change the world for good. Working from the inside, they may help to shape change, but they are in no position to demand it.
Cathy Bernard
New York
The writer is an adjunct associate professor of English at the New York Institute of Technology.
To the Editor:
Re “Keep Our Rivers Flowing Freely,” by Macarena Soler, Monti Aguirre and Juan Pablo Orrego (Op-Ed, Dec. 30):
As American states continue to develop clean energy goals, it’s clear that hydropower is needed to decarbonize our national electricity grid. Despite assertions in the Op-Ed article, hydropower is an essential part of any climate solution and is not a major source of greenhouse gas emissions.
Hydropower is unquestionably a clean, renewable resource. A 2019 study found that the global median greenhouse gas emission intensity of assessed hydropower reservoirs was lower than that of solar photovoltaic, and just slightly higher than nuclear and wind.
Emissions from water, to the extent they exist, are naturally occurring in all lakes, rivers and reservoirs. As such, it would be disingenuous to equate carbon emissions from the natural functioning of a freshwater reservoir ecosystem with a coal- or gas-fired power plant.
Hydropower is a long-term climate solution. And with only 3 percent of America’s 90,000 dams equipped to generate power, hydropower’s potential is immense. As a country, we should be looking to hydropower as an ally in the fight to combat climate change and for a carbon-free future.
Malcolm Woolf
Washington
The writer is president and chief executive of the National Hydropower Association.