Decades After Two Murders, an Appalachian Town Grapples With the Crimes
THE THIRD RAINBOW GIRL
The Long Life of a Double Murder in Appalachia
By Emma Copley Eisenberg
In 1980, three young women set out from Arizona to hitchhike to a peace festival known as the Rainbow Gathering in the mountains of West Virginia. Only one of them survives. Several men in Pocahontas County in rural West Virginia are accused of the murders. A hard-drinking local mechanic is believed to have been the one who pulled the trigger. But that’s where any simple telling of the tale ends and the murders — and who committed them — become a decades-long mystery that nearly tears apart a small Appalachian community.
“The Third Rainbow Girl” is an evocative and elegantly paced examination of the murders that takes a prism-like view of the crime. Everyone in the rural county contributes a piece of evidence, but none of those pieces fit together to build a truthful picture of who killed the two women. Years pass and the once notorious “rainbow murders” fall from the headlines into obscurity. But the stain of guilt on the group of men in Pocahontas County, and the deep-seated trauma inflicted by the unsolved murders on the families of the murdered women, remains.
Abandoning college in the depths of the recession in 2009, Emma Copley Eisenberg, at odds with herself and wanting to “drop so hard out of my life that I could hear my life trying to get in touch,” arrives in Pocahontas County to volunteer at a wilderness camp to help local teenage girls grow into self-reliant women. While working at the camp, she learns about the long-ago murders that took place not far from her new home, and the two murdered women begin to occupy her daily thoughts.
Her unraveling of the brutal double murder is as skilled as her exploration of Pocahontas County, where the men, as much as the women, appear trapped in their predestined societal roles, and where toxic masculinity gnaws at the men, rudderless and lost, who drink to fill the idle hours. But she also digs deeper, beyond the old clichés of insular, backward mountain folk, to find a thriving transgender community and an independent, open-minded streak among the county’s inhabitants.
Eisenberg could have stopped there and had a compelling story, but as in all the best true-crime books, “The Third Rainbow Girl” is about more than just a quest to solve the mystery. It’s also an elegy for a time when Eisenberg came close to her own self-prescribed destruction among the same towering loblolly pines and bending rivers of Pocahontas County. A sudden confession about her own precarious frame of mind zings like a shocking jolt from the pages.
In the end, “The Third Rainbow Girl” is not just a masterly examination of a brutal unsolved crime, which leads us through many surprising twists and turns and a final revelation about who the real killer might be. It’s also an unflinching interrogation of what it means to be female in a society marred by misogyny, where women hitchhiking alone are harshly judged, even blamed for their own murders. In one of her final chapters, Eisenberg quotes the writer Vanessa Veselka, who sums up an overarching sentiment that ripples through the book’s pages. “You can go on a quest to save your father, dress like a man and get discovered upon injury, get martyred and raped,” she writes. “But God forbid you go out the door just to see what’s out there.”