When Elizabeth Warren Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
Today on “The Choice,” the endorsement podcast from NYT Opinion, Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren’s visit to the Times boardroom for her endorsement interview. The editorial board pressed her on how she’ll get her ambitious plans past Mitch McConnell’s Senate, why union workers can’t keep their much-beloved health care, and using trade regulation to encourage the world toward a greener future. Plus: unicorns, billionaire tears and “thank Frances Perkins.”
Then, tune in to the bonus deliberation episode below to hear the board’s reaction to Warren’s interview, the unfortunate polling behind voters excitement to vote for women (just not these women), and how Warren truly has a plan for everything. Also, a deeper conversation with Binyamin Appelbaum over how Warren’s economic proposals compare to those of the broader Democratic field, the support — or lack thereof — for her Medicare for all plan, and the answer that made her sound a lot like Donald Trump.
To read the unabridged transcript from the interview with Senator Warren, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the primary election candidates on the job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different Democratic candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Jan. 30, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to their decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the U.S.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and their endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | PocketCasts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey