Stocks Shrug Off Outbreak Worries and Reach New Record
A third straight day of gains on Wall Street on Wednesday raised stocks to a record, as investors took comfort in signs that the American economy was on solid footing despite risks tied to the spread of the coronavirus both inside and outside China.
The new high is the latest show of resilience from a market that over the last month has shrugged-off the threat of war with Iran, the impeachment trial of President Trump and, most recently, the outbreak of a fast-spreading virus that has upended one of the world’s largest economies.
Worried that efforts to contain the virus would dampen growth in China and elsewhere, traders had battered stock prices last week. But this week, some of the panic seems to have dissipated and shares in the United States and overseas have mostly rallied.
“It’s fear versus greed,” said Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers in Greenwich, Conn. “Last week was fear, and this week is greed.”
The S&P 500 rose 1.1 percent on Wednesday, led by a surge in the shares of energy stocks. Oil prices, which had fallen by more than 20 percent in less than a month, rebounded with prices for a barrel of West Texas Intermediate, a benchmark in oil pricing, rising more than 2 percent.
Prices for copper and iron ore — key raw materials for the Chinese industrial economy — also jumped, suggesting growing optimism for the outlook on the global economy.
Some attributed the rosy outlook among investors to unconfirmed reports of promising research at a Chinese university, in which some drugs had appeared to limit the spread of the virus in some experiments.
The World Health Organization played down those reports, but shares rose in Asia anyway. The CSI 300 in China rose 1.1 percent on Wednesday. In Japan, the Nikkei 225 climbed 1 percent. And the Hang Seng in Hong Kong rose 0.4 percent.
One factor behind this week’s rally is the effort made by the People’s Bank of China to bolster the country’s economy by pouring billions into financial markets. The expectation among investors that central bankers outside Beijing will take similar steps could also be fueling the rebound.
Such actions — which are typically viewed as supportive of risky assets such as stocks — are commonly referred to as a “put” from central banks, and they have been a key driver in the nearly 11-year-old bull market for stocks.

The Federal Reserve’s three rate cuts and the expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet — a byproduct of efforts to raise the level of bank reserves — were widely seen as a reason for a 28.9 percent rise in the stock market in 2019.
Investors seem to be betting that even if the coronavirus weighs on growth, central banks will prop markets up with further rate cuts and capital injections.
“There seems to be a belief that you have this global central banking put, and it is just stronger than it has been over the past few years,” said Yousef Abbasi, global market strategist at INTL FCStone, a financial services and brokerage firm. “Otherwise, this sharp bounce back we’ve experienced in stocks, essentially to all-time highs, is tough to wrap your head around.”
Some analysts have suggested that the market’s rebound may reflect increased expectations that Mr. Trump — who is likely to be acquitted of impeachment charges in the Senate on Wednesday — will win re-election, after the Democratic caucuses in Iowa on Monday spiraled into an inconclusive debacle.
“Basically Iowa turned out to be a nonevent except for being a black eye for the Democratic Party,” Mr. Sosnick said. “The market generally is positive about that.”
China’s economy has likely stalled in the face of the outbreak, but recent reports have shown — at least before the outbreak — the American economy was relatively healthy.
On Wednesday, a key reading on the large American service sector showed it continued to grow in January. A separate report on private sector job growth also showed a bigger-than-expected increase. The report, from payroll processor ADP, is a precursor to the monthly release of employment data — due out on Friday — but is not considered to be strongly correlated with that data.
Many companies have hinted about potential disruptions related to the coronavirus, but the actual profit numbers for the fourth quarter have been solid. Roughly 70 percent of the S&P 500 companies that have reported quarterly results so far have beaten expectations from Wall Street analysts.
The smell of profits has whet the appetite for stocks among investors, after markets dropped in late January. From Jan. 20 to the end of the month, a sell-off stemming from the coronavirus wiped out the 3 percent gain the market had notched through the first few weeks of 2020.
Now the market has recouped all of those losses, with the S&P 500 more than 3 percent higher in 2020. The Nasdaq composite has produced even stronger gains, with the tech-heavy index up more than 5 percent so far this year.
The trading day was not a winner for all investors. Shares of Tesla plummeted 17 percent, reversing much of a remarkable rally that sent the stock soaring in recent days.