‘Bad Boys for Life’ Tops Box Office (Again)
With little competition for its two seasoned stars, Sony’s action-comedy sequel “Bad Boys for Life” easily led movie ticket sales this weekend, maintaining its top spot at the domestic box office for its second weekend in theaters.
“Bad Boys for Life,” which stars Will Smith and Martin Lawrence, sold an estimated $34 million in domestic tickets Friday through Sunday. It brought in an additional $42 million overseas this weekend, according to the studio.
The movie brings back buddy-cop characters Smith and Lawrence originated in the 1995 blockbuster “Bad Boys.” Audiences appear happy with their return: In CinemaScore exit polls, they gave “Bad Boys for Life” an A grade. This weekend provided further proof that Smith and Lawrence can still put plenty of ticket buyers in seats, even after 17 years of radio silence since the sequel “Bad Boys II.”
Not that there was much to stop them.
The only newcomer to the box office’s top five this weekend was another action comedy, STXfilms’s “The Gentlemen,” which opened to an estimated $11 million in domestic sales. That’s a solid success for the smaller-scaler, darker film, which was written and directed by Guy Ritchie (his squeaky-clean “Aladdin” remake exceeded expectations in May).
“The Gentlemen” has an ensemble of stars — Matthew McConaughey, Colin Farrell, Michelle Dockery, Henry Golding and Hugh Grant — with a plot centering on a drug kingpin (McConaughey) eyeing retirement, and a collection of reprobates who want to take his place.
“The Gentlemen” received a fairly warm reception from critics — it currently holds a 72 percent fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes. In her review for The New York Times, Manohla Dargis wrote, “Mostly the movie is about Ritchie’s own conspicuous pleasure directing famous actors having a lark, trading insults, making mischief.”
[Read our critic’s review of “The Gentlemen.”]
“The Gentlemen” landed in fourth place overall, behind a pair of holdovers.
Second place went to Universal’s “1917,” which brought in an estimated $15.8 million in domestic sales this weekend. The World War I drama from Sam Mendes has continued to pick up awards-season steam in the lead-up to the Oscars next month, giving it an advantage at the box office.
Universal’s “Dolittle,” an adventure movie that casts Robert Downey Jr. as the titular, fictional veterinarian, landed in third: It sold around $12.5 million in domestic tickets according to Comscore, which compiles box office data. That’s a paltry amount for a movie that cost at least $200 million to make and market — and was in only its second weekend in domestic theaters.
“The Turning,” a horror movie also distributed by Universal, was released in domestic theaters this weekend but apparently failed to crack the top five. It managed just $7.3 million in estimated ticket sales, which would put it in sixth place, behind Sony’s “Jumanji: The Next Level.” That movie, which was in its seventh weekend in theaters, sold an estimated $7.9 million in tickets Friday through Sunday. Final counts on Monday will determine whether it or “The Turning” landed in fifth.