What’s on TV Friday: ‘Pain and Glory’ and ‘Real Time With Bill Maher’
PAIN AND GLORY (2019) Rent or purchase on iTunes, Amazon, Vudu and Google Play. The nominations for the 92nd annual Academy Awards were announced on Monday, recognizing many of the best films and performances of the year, some of which are already available to stream. Among them is Pedro Almodóvar’s “Pain and Glory,” which was nominated for best international feature film. Antonio Banderas was also nominated for best actor in a leading role, his first Oscar nomination in his nearly 40-year career. Banderas also won the best actor prize at last year’s Cannes Film Festival for this role, as a depressed Spanish filmmaker who bears a curious resemblance to Almodóvar in career and appearance. “These teasing biographical gestures blur the line between reality and representation, but to see this movie as confessional would miss the point,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her New York Times review, in which she designated the film a Critic’s Pick. “The point is the blur, that in-between space where art blooms.”
ARES Stream on Netflix. This new Dutch horror series joins Netflix’s international roster of creepy psychological thrillers like Germany’s “Dark” or the French-Belgian show “Black Spot.” Running for eight episodes, the series follows Rosa (Jade Olieberg) and Jacob (Tobias Kersloot), friends who uncover a secret student society in Amsterdam that appears to share a dress code with the “Eyes Wide Shut” cabal. During their initiation, Rosa and Jacob discover ties to the city’s wealthy and powerful, as well as secrets from their country’s past.
TROOP ZERO Stream on Amazon. This film, adapted from a play by the “Beasts of the Southern Wild” co-writer Lucy Alibar, will likely win over any former scouts who were bitten by the adventure bug at a young age, but wound up regrettably spending more time at troop meetings or selling cookies. It’s 1977, and Christmas Flint (Mckenna Grace), is an outer space-obsessed 12-year-old who decides to form her own Birdie Scout group in a bid to win a contest that would feature the top troop’s voices on one of the Voyager I Golden Records. Christmas taps Rayleen (Viola Davis), a local woman who works for her widowed father (Jim Gaffigan), to lead the group, to which she’s recruited fellow outcasts. Together they work to defeat the popular girls’ troop, presided over by Miss Massey, who is played by Allison Janney. The movie “possesses all the elements of a traditional film about underdogs, retrofitted for a new generation,” Lovia Gyarkye wrote in her Times review.
REAL TIME WITH BILL MAHER 10 p.m. on HBO. Maher kicks off the 18th season of his late-night talk show by welcoming House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on the show amid impeachment proceedings against President Trump. Maher will also chat with Andrew Yang, one of the Democratic candidates running for president, a former tech executive campaigning on establishing a universal basic income of $1,000 per month for all Americans. The journalist and contributing New York Times opinion writer Kara Swisher, the author Jon Meacham and former Representative Joe Walsh will appear as roundtable guests.