Pushing the Wrong Button. Literally.
“The Daily” asks a lot of our newsroom colleagues. Take Ben Dooley, our guest on Tuesday’s show about the fugitive businessman Carlos Ghosn, who escaped house arrest in Tokyo and emerged, a free man, in Beirut.
During the holiday break, we’d heard that Ben was in discussions with Ghosn’s representatives about interviewing him in Beirut, a journalistic coup.
Our first request to Ben? Purchase a high-quality recorder before he left Japan. Ben had an old phone with a so-so internal recorder. We figured his interview with Ghosn would become central to the episode we had in mind and wanted the best possible audio.
His new recorder in hand (a Zoom H4N, for audiophiles), Ben flew to Beirut and carried out our second request: to record his journey and his experience on the ground there. Ben did just that, capturing the sounds of himself boarding planes, entering Lebanon and arriving at Ghosn’s crowded news conference, all of which were incorporated into the episode.
Then came the third request: Record his one-on-one interview with Ghosn. Just before he walked into a conference room to introduce himself to Ghosn, Ben started recording. Or so he thought.
“There were a lot of buttons,” Ben told us. “Unfortunately, when it came to the key moment, I pressed the wrong one.”
The Zoom H4N never ended up recording the interview. But, in a heroic turn, Ben had used his cellphone recorder as a backup. That gave us an alternate version of the audio, albeit a less crisp one.
That brought us to our final request — an interview with Ben that would stitch together all the audio he’d captured and turn it into an episode. Ben had returned to Tokyo, which is 14 hours ahead of New York. He generously agreed to let us speak to him starting at 11 p.m. his time, staying on the line until well after midnight.
We couldn’t resist a teasing reference to his audio troubles.
In the end, the episode was a sound-rich journey through Ben’s reporting and Ghosn’s epic escape — and a tribute to what our colleagues are willing to do to tell a great story in audio.
Talk to Michael on Twitter: @mikiebarb.
Our producer Sydney Harper on what it was like to be at the U.S. Capitol with the congressional reporter Nicholas Fandos on Wednesday, when the seven House impeachment managers delivered the articles of impeachment to the Senate:
Security was tight at the Capitol that day, and we weren’t allowed to follow the impeachment managers as they walked from the House to the Senate. We were told, instead, to pick a spot for the ceremonial transfer and just stay there. Our options were limited: Stand on the House side and watch them depart, saying, “There go the managers!” or stand on the Senate side and watch them approach, saying, “Here come the managers!” We went with the second option.
As a producer at the scene of a milestone moment like the one on Wednesday, you’re operating within two headspaces. On the one hand, you have to focus on the sound. There I was, awkwardly crowding Nick Fandos with a 10-inch microphone while cameras clicked furiously around us — a typical day in the life of a producer.
But it wasn’t just a typical day. As much as I tried to keep my mind on doing my job, it hit me that this job had brought me to the doors of the Senate chamber, watching this moment play out before my eyes. I’d overheard a guard come across a young man with a congressional intern badge and make him promise not to engage in any “partisan shouting” as the articles of impeachment passed by. He assured the guard that he wouldn’t. “I’m just witnessing history!” he said. I couldn’t help but relate.
Monday: As wildfires devastate ecosystems across Australia, the prime minister is keeping climate change out of the conversation, Livia Albeck-Ripka reports.
Tuesday: “The great irony here is that he says he’s searching for justice, but because of a decision that he made, he may never find it.” Ben Dooley spoke with Carlos Ghosn after the businessman’s escape from Tokyo.
Wednesday: Nicole Perlroth on what to expect from Russia this election cycle: There have “been no repercussions for Russian interference in 2016 — at least not enough to keep them from doing the same thing all over again in 2020.”
Thursday: The impeachment trial of President Trump has begun. Nick Fandos on what is likely to happen.
Friday: Senator Bernie Sanders is courting the Latino vote in California. Is it working? “He’s white. But still, he’s your tío,” one supporter told Jenny Medina.
Have thoughts about the show? Tell us what you think at thedaily@nytimes.com.
Were you forwarded this newsletter? Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox.
Love podcasts? Join The New York Times Podcast Club on Facebook.