What to Watch For in President Trump’s Impeachment Trial on Wednesday
WASHINGTON — After a marathon debate about how to conduct the impeachment trial, the Senate will formally move into the oral arguments phase of the proceeding on Wednesday as the House managers open their case to convict President Trump and remove him from office.
The managers will present their two articles of impeachment charging Mr. Trump with abuse of power and obstruction of Congress as they begin what will be as much as 24 hours of opening arguments over three days. With no guarantee of being able to call witnesses later, these three days may be the main opportunity for the prosecution.
What we’re expecting to see: Each of the seven House managers, led by Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California, will present different elements of the case in a series of speeches. They will have a chance to make their points without being challenged by either senators or the White House lawyers, who will get their opportunity to make arguments later.
When we’re likely to see it: The trial convenes at 1 p.m. Eastern and will last through the afternoon and into the evening. If the managers divide their total of 24 allotted hours evenly over three days, the arguments could go until 9 p.m. or later depending on breaks. The White House could pre-empt the arguments with a motion to dismiss on Wednesday morning, but allies said it was unlikely to do so because it does not have enough votes.
How to follow it: The New York Times’s congressional team will be following the developments on Capitol Hill and reporters covering the White House will get the latest from Mr. Trump’s defense team. Visit nytimes.com for coverage throughout the day.
Even though these will be the official opening arguments, many of the points that will be heard on Wednesday may feel familiar to anyone who hung through Tuesday’s session, which dragged on for nearly 13 hours into the wee hours of Wednesday morning.
In theory, the Tuesday debate was about process — will witnesses and documents be sought or not? — but both sides used the discussion to describe the facts and offer their interpretations of what they meant. The challenge for the managers on Wednesday, therefore, will be to introduce their case again in a coherent and compelling way that will capture the attention of 100 senators sitting muzzled at their desks.
The advantage for the managers is that they will have the microphone to themselves, at least on the floor. The White House lawyers will not be able to challenge the managers’ assertions but will have to wait for their turn to start, most likely on Saturday. Likewise, the senators, who are bound by a vow of silence, will not get their chance to weigh in until probably next Tuesday or Wednesday, when they will be able to submit questions in writing through Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., who is presiding over the trial.
The only liquids allowed on the Senate floor during the trial are water and milk, but Chief Justice Roberts could be forgiven for wishing for a good jolt of coffee.
After presiding over the Senate trial until nearly 2 a.m., the chief justice had to head to his day job later Wednesday, presiding over oral arguments at the Supreme Court at 10 a.m. before returning to the Senate chamber for another session starting at 1 p.m.
The arguments at the Supreme Court focused on a different issue than the one at stake on the Senate floor but one that has been hotly disputed nonetheless. The case, Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue, focuses on a since-disbanded voucher program in Montana that provided tax breaks for donors to scholarships for private schools, including religious schools.
After running the oral arguments at the court in the morning, the chief justice will resume his temporary assignment as presiding officer at the Senate proceeding, a role that so far has been essentially ministerial with the exception of his late-night chiding of both sides to keep civil.
The defendant had his say on Wednesday, not from the courtroom, but from television cameras half a world away.
During an unplanned news conference in Davos, Switzerland, where he was attending the World Economic Forum, Mr. Trump hurled insults at two of the prominent House managers, calling Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, the Judiciary Committee chairman, a “sleaze bag” and branding Mr. Schiff a “con job” and a “corrupt politician.”
Mr. Trump said he would love to attend his own trial — something his lawyers have advised against — so he could “sit right in the front row and stare into their corrupt faces.” But he said he would be reluctant to allow John R. Bolton, his former national security adviser, to testify because he left the administration on bad terms, “due to me — not due to him.”
Aside from the news conference, Mr. Trump was active on Twitter, posting or reposting roughly 100 messages overnight and into the morning. He left Davos after the news conference and was scheduled to land at Joint Base Andrews outside Washington at 4:50 p.m.