‘The Cactus League,’ by Emily Nemens: An Excerpt
Welcome to Salt River Fields, the newest spring training facility in Scottsdale, Arizona. Turn east off of Pima, drive down the fresh boulevard, Lions Way. You’re flanked by parking lots so new they still smell like tar, their white hatching wet: ample parking for the anticipated crowds, already sold out for opening day. Note the median’s plantings: environmentally sustainable xeriscape. Of course, this is 2011, and the club cares about our natural resources, is mindful of the perpetual drought in Phoenix metro. A few Christmas cacti bloom, despite it being February.
And here, at the terminus of the boulevard, the centerpiece of the multi-feld complex: the twelve-thousand-seat stadium that will be the new springtime home of your Los Angeles Lions. Take it all in—the crisp-chalked diamond, the ruddy arc of infield, the bright checkerboard of the outfield. It’s not easy to grow grass like that in the desert— I offer a hat tip to the grounds crew. And see out past the warning track and fence? There’s the shock-green tilt of a well-watered general-admission lawn. Farther still, on the horizon: a ridge of mountains, jutting into the blue like the teeth of some mile-high rusted saw.
Take note of the architecture, too: the exposed steel beams and brick, a slate-gray cantilevered canopy over a sunken seating bowl, the polished concrete rotunda and concourse. A classic-looking stadium. Timeless in design, some might say, even if it’s anything but. Nothing is static, not the bluegrass-ryegrass blend growing out there, not the architecture, not the angle of the sun hitting the seats. And not a man’s career, especially not a ballplayer the first weeks of spring. His batting average, his ambition, his hopes: all is in flux. I’m looking toward Lions left fielder Jason Goodyear as I write this, coming off a Gold Glove and a close second place in American League MVP voting, coming off a possible divorce and a lonely drive across the desert in his busted old Jeep. (Doesn’t Cadillac give you a car if you do that many ads?) But that feeling of uncertainty isn’t reserved for All-Stars and the freshly dumped; it could apply to any player on the squad, any coach on the bench, any man in the executive suite, any fan in the stands. I’m looking at his entourage: his agent, Herb Allison, his maybe-wife, Liana, his favorite minor league batting coach, and the devotees who would give an eye tooth just to be near him. It’s all up in the air.
[ Return to the review of “The Cactus League.” ]
Here’s the thing about baseball, and all else: everything changes. Whether it’s the slow creep of glaciers dripping toward the sea, or the steady piling up of cut stones, rock upon rock until the wall reaches chest high, nothing is still. Sometimes change comes as quick and catastrophic as a line drive—hear the crack of wood displacing a sphere of leather, yarn, rubber, and cork; watch how it pushes the ball fat and then, just as quickly, forward. The action springs the left fielder from his squat, and the man’s metal spikes tear into the turf, kicking up tiny wedges of grass, sending them toward the sky.
Sure, I followed I-10 across the desert to write the story of one remarkable man, but baseball’s not that kind of game. It’s too long and complicated to say, He did this, he said that, then this happened. That sufficed when I was first working the beat, still wet behind the ears and liable to get lost on my way to the press room. Back then, it was Get the score, get the quote, add a little color, and file—162 times a year. (More if you were lucky and your team took any sort of postseason run. September, October, that was the only time the rest of the newsroom took us serious. And no editor was ponying up for spring ball—that’s what the wires were for.) I was such a kid, spooked by his own damn shadow, downright fearful of asking any kind of tough question, something that might be construed as disagreeable. Now, I’m no muckraker, and not setting out to take down a great man, but in this life things are complex, some questions are hard, and that’s why I drove to Arizona in the first place.
It’s not that those early reports of mine were totally off the mark. Ask any fan, and she’ll tell you there’s something satisfyingly linear about baseball: three strikes, three outs. Four bases, nine innings. A lineup, for chrissake—you don’t need to be an etymologist to see the meaning in that. But at the same time as that steady progression of three up, three down, then the next, then the next, it’s going around and around, cycling through the order, running around the bases. Things get parabolic. There’s the arc of up and down through the organization, from Single-A Carolina to the big time in Culver City, the tight arc of an infield-fly out and the majestic one of a game-winning homer. Charting the line gets mighty complicated: there are so many men playing together, so many more behind the scenes, coaching and cajoling and sometimes sabotaging the game’s progress, pulling the line until it goes bonkers, more like a dance chart than any sort of arrow.
None of that nuance goes onto the score sheet, none of it gets printed in the next morning’s recap. The paper’s box scores, like my early reports, don’t hardly scratch the surface of what happened: there are so many stories behind that neat summary. Triumphs, failures, vindications, yes. But just as many stories end not with “out three” but “out maybe”—fly balls that never do fall, men who never stop running ’round the bags.
So to tell Jason Goodyear’s story will take a while, require not just Jason but a whole web of people who are touched by him, and a few who long to touch him, too. I know it sounds crazy, but when it gets down to telling the story of the league’s best outfielder, as much will happen in parking lots as on the field, as much in backyards as in deep left. So no, it’s not as easy as, He did this, he said that, then this happened. It’s more, He did this, he said that, and then the whole world unfurled.
It’s how things go in baseball; after decades on this beat I should know. And so, I’d encourage you to find your seat, settle in, and get ready for a long game.
[ Return to the review of “The Cactus League.” ]