Harvey Weinstein on Trial: What’s Happened So Far
[Want to get New York Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.]
It’s Monday.
Weather: A chance of flurries in the morning, then mostly cloudy with a high in the mid-40s.  
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Feb. 12 (Lincoln’s Birthday).
One of the most anticipated criminal proceedings in recent memory has been unfolding in a downtown Manhattan courthouse: the rape trial of Harvey Weinstein.
Here’s what has happened so far.
Last week, in opening statements, prosecutors offered tawdry details about what they said were Mr. Weinstein’s assaults on women; graphic testimony from witnesses followed.
The actress Annabella Sciorra testified that Mr. Weinstein had raped her in her Manhattan apartment in the early 1990s. On another occasion, she said, he showed up uninvited outside her hotel room in his underwear, with baby oil in one hand and a videotape in the other.
On yet another, prosecutors said, Mr. Weinstein injected erection medication into his genitals before sexually assaulting a woman.
The week ended with testimony from the actress Rosie Perez, who said Ms. Sciorra had told her in 1993 that Mr. Weinstein attacked her.
This week, prosecutors will continue to make their case that Mr. Weinstein, a former powerful film producer, was a sexual predator who repeatedly used his influence and imposing physicality to overpower women in his orbit.
The trial has drawn swarms of reporters and onlookers to State Supreme Court in Lower Manhattan.
It has also drawn protesters against Mr. Weinstein, who was publicly accused in late 2017 of sexually assaulting scores of women, prompting the #MeToo movement.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers called it all a “carnival-like atmosphere” and an “unprecedented media spectacle” that could hamper a fair trial.
Their request that the trial be moved out of New York City was denied by the judge and an appellate court.
Mr. Weinstein is accused of raping an aspiring actress in a Midtown Manhattan hotel room in 2013 and of forcing oral sex on a production assistant in his TriBeCa apartment in 2006.
Six women are expected to testify against him at the trial. He is accused of five felony counts, including rape and predatory sexual assault, and could be sentenced to life in prison if convicted of the last charge.
During opening arguments, prosecutors told a jury of seven men and five women that Mr. Weinstein was “not just a titan in Hollywood, but a rapist.”
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers denied the claims and tried to paint the accusers as opportunistic women who willingly had transactional sex with Mr. Weinstein to advance their own careers. Some continued intimate relationships with him after the alleged attacks, his lawyers said.
More coverage:
Annabella Sciorra Testifies in Harvey Weinstein Trial: ‘He Raped Me’
Rosie Perez, at Weinstein Trial, Backs Up Rape Allegation
These Are the 6 Women Who Are Testifying Against Harvey Weinstein
Weinstein Rape Trial: ‘Project Runway’ Assistant Testifies
Top Latino Mayoral Hopeful in New York City Drops Out
Before Trump Rally in N.J., Justice Dept. Joins Local Immigration Case
Inside the Jennifer Dulos Murder Inquiry: What 5 Warrants Reveal
Examining How Police Bullets Shattered a Brooklyn Family. Twice.
Want more news? Check out our full coverage.
The Mini Crossword: Here is today’s puzzle.
The Chelsea Flea Market, which closed last month, will reopen under new management. [Gothamist]
City Councilman Rafael Espinal of Brooklyn resigned to take a job with a union. [New York Post]
The police are investigating an attack on a transgender woman on the subway as a hate crime. [NBC New York]
Join Professor John K. Papadopoulos for a talk, “New Evidence From Ancient Methone,” at the National Arts Club in Manhattan. 6:30 p.m. [Free with R.S.V.P.; $10 suggested donation]
ECHOensemble and Alex Beckmann perform as part of ECHOfest, an event focused on movement, sound and space, at ChaShaMa at One Brooklyn Bridge Park. 7:30 p.m. [$15]
The Way Station in Brooklyn hosts “Rushed Hour 7,” a comedy show. 8:30 p.m. [Free]
— Melissa Guerrero
Events are subject to change, so double-check before heading out. For more events, see the going-out guides from The Times’s culture pages.
While it is not uncommon to see hawks and falcons in Manhattan, a bald eagle perched against a backdrop of the borough’s high-rises is remarkable.
But one has become a regular visitor on the West Side. It was recently spotted in a tree in Riverside Park by park workers, in a wooded area just north of 110th Street.
They took notice of its brown plumage, its white head and tail and its large, hooked beak. They shot a photo that the Riverside Park Conservancy posted on its Twitter feed.
Birders quickly headed over to get a glimpse of the eagle, which kept returning to the area day after day.
One birder, David Barrett, said that bald eagles are common in Manhattan “if you know where to look,” and that they are usually spotted in flight because they favor watery locations to feed on fish.
“To see one perched in a tree is rare,” said Mr. Barrett, a competitive birder who claims to have spotted 272 species in Manhattan.
It is likely that the eagle lives north of the area but returns during the day to take advantage of a good fishing spot over the Hudson River, he said.
The bald eagle, America’s national bird, nearly became extinct several decades ago but has bounced back in numbers and was taken off the federal endangered species list in 1995.
It’s Monday — keep your eyes on the skies.
Dear Diary:
In 1967, I left the convent after five years and moved from western New York to Queens.
I had taken a job with a social services agency, and on this particular day I was riding the subway from Midtown Manhattan to Brooklyn. I was going to visit a teenager who had just been released from a residential program for delinquent boys.
On the train, I studied the subway map, trying to determine my whereabouts. An older man who was sitting across from me came over and asked my destination. He proceeded to show me which stop was mine.
We chatted for a bit. I asked him where he was headed. We had already missed the stop he had mentioned, but I said nothing.
When it was time for me to get off, he came with me. Puzzled, I asked why he hadn’t gotten off earlier. He said he wanted to make sure I was O.K.
I was concerned about what he would do next. He told me that he would just go up the stairs, down the other side and then back to his destination on the next train.
I went on my way, knowing my adventures were going to be fine.
— Marge Volpe
New York Today is published weekdays around 6 a.m. Sign up here to get it by email. You can also find it at nytoday.com.
We’re experimenting with the format of New York Today. What would you like to see more (or less) of? Post a comment or email us: nytoday@nytimes.com.