As Fed Meets, Treasury Bill-Buying Campaign Draws Investors’ Eyes
After months of mostly smooth sailing, is the market getting ready to throw a tantrum?
Investors will watch the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy committee meeting closely on Wednesday for the faintest wisp of information on the central bank’s plans to pare back its recent round of Treasury security purchases.
Since October, when it began to buy Treasury bills, the Fed has pumped $60 billion in fresh money into the world’s financial markets each month. Policymakers have said that buying will continue “at least into” the second quarter of 2020, but the pace of those purchases and how quickly they will slow remains a wild card.
The Fed began snapping up securities after a tumultuous episode in money markets last year. The central bank had just stopped shrinking its holdings of Treasury securities when, in September, a key short-term rate jumped out of whack. Banks were holding onto their cash and reluctant to lend to their peers — a sign that the Fed had gone too far.
Since then, officials have been pumping cash into the market for short-term loans between banks, called repurchase agreements or “repos,” to keep the market functioning smoothly. While that effort is temporary, bill purchases are a longer-lived fix. The two programs added about $400 billion to the central bank’s holdings in the second half of 2019.
As the Fed prepares to tiptoe away from bill-buying in particular, it is creating a tense moment for Wall Street. Stock prices have risen on the back of the purchases, and analysts warn that the gains could fade as buying slows.
“That will take away some of the fuel that has probably been able to help the markets out,” said Joseph Kalish, chief global macro strategist at Ned Davis Research, a market research firm.
Chair Jerome H. Powell is widely expected to field questions about the Fed’s plans at a news conference after its two-day policy meeting on Wednesday. The meeting itself is expected to produce little drama — the Fed is likely to leave rates unchanged — but Mr. Powell’s comments about the purchases could generate headlines and roil markets.
Fed officials took pains to clarify from the start that the Treasury bill purchases were simply a technical fix aimed at lifting the amount of bank reserves in the financial system. The multibillion-dollar effort was not, they insisted, the same as the “quantitative easing” bond-buying programs it periodically undertook after the financial crisis to aid economic growth.
Nobody in financial markets cared what it was called. To them, it was a reason to buy stocks.
“The market doesn’t really discriminate between what’s causing the balance sheet to expand,” said Ed Yardeni, president of Yardeni Research, an investment strategy consulting firm. “If it’s expanding, it’s bullish.”
It is not conclusive that the Fed’s expanding balance sheet — its portfolio of financial holdings — has been driving market gains.
Some economists doubt the merits of that explanation. (The gains also coincided with an easing of trade tensions between the United States and China.)
But there is a widespread narrative that the program is helping stocks, which makes any signal about its future crucial for investors.
“It’s about how he delivers the message,” said Seth Carpenter, chief United States economist at UBS. “They have a decided incentive to give as much guidance as they can, just to set expectations early.”
The S&P 500 is up roughly 10 percent since the Fed’s Oct. 11 announcement — a climb that was remarkably steady before an outbreak of the coronavirus in China set off a recent return of volatility.
The purchases were among the Fed’s actions that helped drive outsize returns across financial markets last year.
After raising rates four times in 2018, Mr. Powell’s central bank suddenly swiveled away from plans for further increases in the face of tumbling stock markets, signs of global economic weakness and tepid inflation.
The Fed instead ended up cutting rates three times last year, moves widely credited as a key driver of the stock market’s 28.9 percent gain.
But if recent history is any guide, the growth of the Fed’s balance sheet could have played an important, if less transparent, role in the rally of virtually every financial market last year.
The central bank began large-scale buying Treasury debt and mortgage-backed securities in March 2009, the same month that the bull run for stocks began. When the Fed tried in 2010 to pause that program — known as quantitative easing — stocks slumped until it became clear that the Fed would restart its buying.
Another momentary end to bond-buying in 2011 also coincided with a rocky run for the S&P 500. But a third-round of quantitative easing in late 2012 helped supercharge stocks. The S&P 500 rocketed up by a combined 44 percent in 2013 and 2014.
The Fed’s balance sheet has narrowed slightly to $4.15 trillion since the beginning of the year as its repo injections became smaller. That program was always seen as temporary, so its slowing does not create the same potential for market disruption as the bill purchases, analysts say.
Eventually, the central bank plans to stop the larger-scale purchases and expand its holdings just in line with the broader economy.
But the exact timing, and the balance sheet’s ultimate size, are anyone’s guess.
Mr. Carpenter at UBS expects the Fed to continue buying $60 billion into March before tapering off those purchases. Bank of America analysts expect the Fed will carry on buying $60 billion in Treasury bills through June.
But they note that “risks are skewed” toward slower purchases. Either way could matter to markets.
“Fed balance sheet growth has likely supported the recent risk rally, but is unlikely the dominant driver, in our view,” the Bank of American analysts wrote.
To be clear, no one is sure of the exact mechanism by which the growth of the Fed’s balance sheet pushes stocks up.
But for investors, the basic point is that over the last decade the market adage “don’t fight the Fed” has been one of the most effective bits of investment advice available. When the Fed was buying, investors had better be, too.
The flip side, of course, is that markets have grown acutely sensitive to any indication that the Fed would shrink the bank’s balance sheet. In 2018, as the Fed lifted interest rates four times while reducing the size of the balance sheet, an across-the-board sell-off of stocks, bonds and commodities followed suit.
And perhaps the most famous example of this dynamic hit the markets in May 2013, after then-Fed Chair Ben S. Bernanke hinted in congressional testimony that the Fed could start to cut back on its bond-buying programs sooner than many had expected. The markets panicked, with stock and bond markets selling off simultaneously.
The Fed is faced with a similar, if less dramatic, communication challenge this year.
“If the market perception is that the Fed is pouring in liquidity and that’s boosting asset prices, once they start to pare back these Treasury purchases and or the overall sizes of the repo operations, it could be that the markets throw a bit of a tantrum,” said Kathy Bostjancic, chief United States financial economist at Oxford Economics.