Do You Think the World Is Getting Closer to Securing the Promise of ‘Never Again’?
Note to Teachers: The article linked below contains photographs from the Holocaust and includes images of violence and murder. Please preview before sharing with students.
As the Holocaust ended and people in the death camps were liberated, almost immediately survivors began to say: Never again. Never again would there be a systematic attempt to destroy the Jewish people. Never again would genocide devastate any ethnic, national, racial or religious group.
In 1948, the United Nations General Assembly unanimously adopted the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Since then, 152 countries have ratified that treaty. World leaders and international organizations have pledged to work together to prevent a future holocaust from happening.
Yet in the 75 years since the Holocaust ended, there have been other genocides — including in Cambodia in the 1970s and in Rwanda in the 1990s. The world has already failed. Are the 2020s looking better? Are we moving in the right direction?
What do you think? What does “Never again” me to you? Do you feel that genocide is still possible in 2020?
Do you think the world has learned the lessons of history? Is international law stronger? Is education better? Is the media too omnipresent to allow a systematic campaign of hatred and violence against any minority group?
In “75 Years After Auschwitz Liberation, Worry That ‘Never Again’ Is Not Assured,” Marc Santora writes about the relevance of “never again” to today’s world:
Many historians and individuals have emphasized the importance of preserving the stories of survivors, and the physical memory of the Holocaust in places like Auschwitz, which now is a memorial and museum:
The article concludes with a quote by Zofia Posmysz, a 96-year-old Polish survivor of Auschwitz, who was concerned about Mr. Putin’s comments:
Students, read the entire article, then tell us:
Does that information change your opinion in any way?