Becoming a Man
I
t’s April 2018, and my wife of 20 years, Lynette, and I are on our way to my parents’ house. This is our first cross-­country drive since my transition. We drive Interstate 90 from Boston through New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, then finally to my childhood home, Elkhart, Ind. One highway, 880 miles. Though I’m 51, I’m outfitted as if I’m in my mid-20s, the decade of my life I most mourn missing as a man: I’m bearded, wearing overpriced sweats, exclusive sneakers that you have to compete to buy before they sell out and, as always, a Chicago Cubs baseball hat. My integration into the straight white America of middle-­aged, middle-­class couples who road trip across the United States is seamless.
Every time we stop, some white man starts a conversation with me. Lynette is in disbelief. “You’re such a guy’s guy,” she says. “I just don’t get it.” It’s true. I fit right in with all the white dudes along this Interstate. The guys who really love to chat it up with me are usually about my age, maybe a few years older, but they think I’m a younger man and talk to me in some version of “fatherly bro.”
We stop for the night at the Hampton Inn near Ashtabula, Ohio, and we meet John Bolton and his wife — it’s not really John Bolton, the former national security adviser to President Trump, but he looks just like a slightly younger version of him: bushy white hair and what they call a walrus mustache. Mr. Bolton’s relaxed-­fit jeans, golf shirt and white Reeboks (sneakers that are back in fashion, though I doubt he knows this) make him indistinguishable from all the other 50-­something white men we have seen pulling off the Interstate. He sees me get out of the car with a bottle of small-batch bourbon. He and his wife are pulling pillows and sleeping bags from their Hyundai, as if they are on a camping trip. They have done this drive before.
“Hey,” he says, smiling. “Don’t be partying it up too loud tonight. We have to pull out of here early tomorrow. You a Cubs fan?”
“Yeah,” I reply, “since birth. Grew up in Indiana, and we don’t have our own baseball team.”
“No kidding. We’re from Noblesville, about 45 minutes out of Indy. You know it?”
“You bet I do. They had a pretty good basketball team when I was in high school. I’m from Elkhart.”
The conversation continues the next morning at breakfast. We’re all heading out early. Lynette and I learn that Mr. Bolton and his wife have been on four cruises, all to the Caribbean. “Cruises are the only way to vacation,” he tells us. “You have to try one.” The local Fox affiliate is blaring in the room with the free breakfast buffet, airing the story of two black men who were arrested after sitting at a Starbucks for a few minutes without ordering while they waited for another man. There are two other white couples eating waffles and boxed eggs, and we all look at the screen. Then everyone around us quickly looks away.
Mrs. Bolton starts to choke on her bagel. Mr. Bolton stands behind her and says, “You need me to hit you in the back?” He looks at me. “I like to have an excuse to hit her.” He thinks he’s funny. I see Lynette grimace. How many times have I heard my father make these “jokes” about my mom? When she needed some dental work done in her early 70s, he told her, “You don’t need teeth in the grave,” and refused to pay for it. He couldn’t wait to tell Lynette and me this joke during one of our visits, repeating it 50 times to emphasize his clever humor. Lynette and I left my mom a check for $1,200 on our way out the door.
My father soured me on the idea of manhood from the get-go. My wife wasn’t encouraging around the subject. She has identified as a lesbian for 40 years, and though she loves boys, especially our nephews, men haven’t been of particular interest to her. She never had any intention of living with one. And as much as I had done every single thing to look like a man and live like one, I denied wanting to become one because I didn’t want to become my father or lose my lesbian lover or be a failed feminist and intellectual.
I had been living as a white Midwestern woman for 50 years and 10 months until one weekend, I crossed a line: After seven months on testosterone, I checked in at the Hotel Chandler in Midtown Manhattan around 6 p.m. “Good evening, sir. How are you?” the receptionist asked me. This wasn’t my first “sir,” but it was the one that began my new life. On March 16, 2017, I became a man.
There were so many political ramifications of this new body — ramifications I both knew but couldn’t know until I began to live them. I came into being as a white man seven months before #MeToo filled our social media and news feeds. Women would unsilence themselves and begin the arduous process of dismantling the lives of individual men of every color, though mostly white, for unspeakable acts of discrimination, harassment, assault and abuse. Depending on who sees me and in what context, my body is grouped with these men in this period of our history.
This new body threatened the chronology of history and memories for others. “Be prepared to lose everything,” my health care provider told me when I started testosterone. It hardly felt like a warning, because I thought I couldn’t lose everything fast enough. I wanted her to stop talking and just give me that shot. But she was right, and over the course of these three years, I have had to face the loss. It’s taboo in the trans community to use someone’s “dead name.” Do not, for example, put a dead name in an obituary, or refer to the time when she was he if he is now she. But Polly had been around for 50 years; she knew what it was to be treated as a woman and lived inside the confines of the female gender. Carl is beginning to know the freedom of being a man and what happens in spaces where only men are allowed to go. Polly felt intensely the discrimination involved in being a successful woman in her profession. Carl witnesses the discrimination against women everywhere now in a way that Polly’s body couldn’t bear to take in.
I am in one way “becoming” a man. But in another way, I have always been one, and I’m trying out all the ways to live as one, some good, some bad. One night I was in a Lyft talking to a guy who was a dental technician trying to join the Navy. He told me he was doing it “for his woman.” “I think she’s the one,” he said tentatively. “They only want your money, and I’ve told her I haven’t got any, but I’m making her sign a prenup anyway.”
I heard myself say, “Yeah, man, I feel you — all that bullshit about women’s rights.” He laughed and said, “Yeah, you know, my man, you know what I’m saying.” I tipped him $10 and gave him five stars for letting me indulge my inner sexist jerk.
My friend Lee tells me it’s my job to correct this behavior, and sometimes I do, but sometimes I dive right in, trying to grasp at some false sense of power that I know has been used against me a thousand times in another life. It feels good to blow off steam with another man for just a moment. Becoming a white man visibly is like a newly found superpower — when Spider-­Man suddenly realizes he can scale the sides of buildings but doesn’t quite know how to control his own power and smashes up against a concrete wall on his first several attempts.
I am always doubling as different selves in different spaces, sometimes as trans Carl who lived half a century in a woman’s body, still holding all of Polly’s memories, and sometimes as “dude” Carl along the Interstate and in the back of some Lyft. I am still learning how to navigate the multiple truths this body inhabits.
[When my cousin tried to kill me he forced me to come to terms with how an idea of masculinity poisoned his life — and mine.]
When we arrive in Elkhart and land on Bristol Street, we are greeted by a Confederate flag waving high atop a pole in front of one of the 1960s suburban-­style homes that pepper my parents’ once-­wealthy suburb. My parents bought after all the rich people left, and the homes had been on the market for years. MAGA signs are in full bloom as we turn into my parents’ driveway. My father is ill. His kidneys aren’t working, and he has just come out of surgery. My mother’s dementia is making it impossible for her to track that my father is seriously ill. His mind, by contrast, is as sharp as ever, but his body is wrecked by years of abuse — alcoholism into his 30s, chain-­smoking until a quintuple bypass at 65, Type 2 diabetes since his mid-50s, never a lick of exercise. None of us thought he would ever make it to 77. But here we are. My brothers and I are realizing our worst nightmare, having to take care of a man none of us have ever liked, who never gave a thought to anyone but himself — a scared, mostly mean man who has taken advantage of all of us and now expects us to come running to his bedside.
Our entire lives my father, whenever he was home, has been sitting in a blue leather recliner barking orders at us. It’s like a sitcom on toxic white masculinity — Archie Bunker, except that over time, as my father moved from staunch Republican to a more moderate Democrat, the politics sound more liberal. The buttons on the television remote control are erased by the wear of his thumb switching the channels from westerns to sports to news. It’s total control, all of us held hostage to his cruel sense of humor and his tightfisted attention that centers on only himself. Whenever my brothers have visited with their children, he won’t change his viewing patterns. Kids wanting to watch cartoons are simply out of luck. If any of us, brothers and mother, leave the television room, our name is instantly called, summoned back to watch a replay, or to get him an orange juice, a fresh cup of coffee, a bowl of sugar-­free ice cream, or just to listen to whatever he is rambling on about because he never stops talking, never stops narrating every damn thing he thinks or does or plans to do.
My father’s father painted houses for a living, drank too much for a time and sat in a recliner and yelled at my grandmother for most of the years I knew him. “Cookie, bring me an iced tea.” “Cookie, I’m starving. Get me a sandwich.” “Cookie, turn that radio off. I’m watching the game!” They fought constantly, she running around to serve him while he shouted orders and moaned: “My legs are bothering me.” “My sugar’s too high.” “Look at the arthritis in that finger.” My father’s chatter is a replica of his father’s — he, too, reduced to life in his recliner, on oxygen, his partial teeth sitting on the table next to him. The only thing he is in control of now is the TV remote — and my mother.
My father’s masculinity was shaped by my grandfather’s, shaped by poverty, shaped by military service, shaped by bars and poker games and the freedom of not feeling responsible to be home with his children. Men like my father and grandfather — on edge, talking too much, asserting power even when lying on their backs — practice a burned-­out masculinity that is still at the center of American life, still the building block of patriarchy.
My father was an Office of Special Investigations agent in the Air Force and was stationed at the Osan Air Base in South Korea for a year in 1964, where his job was to sucker homosexuals into outing themselves and getting kicked out of the military. He was a smooth talker, and he bragged he could get anyone to break down in their own shame. He tells the story of how he would take a man out to a bar, get him drunk and talking, and pretty soon he could see the guy was going to confess that he was gay. My dad admitted to feeling bad, of almost wanting to stop the conversation before the reveal. “These were nice guys,” he told me. But he reveled in his ability to manipulate other men. This is how a little guy can have power. He was a salesman of one sort or another his entire life, his chatty personality always a big hit at work, at least to start, but he could never put his brains and popularity together into a successful life. At one point, he was making great money managing recreational-­vehicle dealerships, but he used the company credit card to gamble and was fired by his boss, a woman. I learned how men talked about powerful women when he came home that day unemployed.
When I was in college, my father called me in my dorm room and my brother in his and told us to meet him at the bank right away. Our college tuition was late, and he didn’t have the money to pay what wasn’t already covered by scholarships and student loans. We hadn’t received any warning but found ourselves at the bank, each of us signing onto a credit-­card contract and taking a cash advance of several thousand dollars to pay our tuition. The credit cards had to be in our names because my father’s credit was maxed out, and he didn’t have the money to pay his own bills. I remember being awash in fear that I would be kicked out of college for delinquent payments. My body knew what the threat of creditors felt like. My mom wouldn’t answer the phone because most of the time it was either the mortgage company threatening to foreclose on the house or the electric company threatening to turn off the lights. I learned to live in fear of the ring tone, listening to my mom crying and pleading for more time whenever she did answer. I was happy to sign on the dotted line if it meant I could stay in school and avoid the embarrassment of having to leave college because of debt. My father repeatedly told the story of the sacrifice he made to pay for our college years, as if he would have been able to retire with a condo in Florida and a small fishing shack, his supposed dream situation, if only we hadn’t permanently broken him financially.
During his Republican phase, my father helped me become a racist and a homophobe. In junior high, I would call my older brother Tim a “faggot” when we fought. I didn’t know what that word meant. I had never knowingly met a gay person. But I learned quickly how to be as cruel as my father. Tim was a quiet and sensitive boy who sat in his room and drew and painted all day and night. He rarely dated and had few friends, and I knew how to take him down with one word. When I came home from graduate school and told my father I was gay, he didn’t speak to me for a year.
My father’s racism, if you can write about gradations of racism, is less overt than that of most white people I know in Elkhart, but that isn’t anything to brag about. The rare moments he was home when I was a kid, we would watch our favorite teams, the Indiana Hoosiers and Notre Dame. He would yell at the black players from his recliner, calling them wimps or worse. His early and ongoing training can never be fully undone. My unconscious mind still remembers these lessons as a kind of reflex. Please, I beg my therapist, purge my father and Elkhart and American history from my body.
I don’t want to be a terrible son, a terrible person, but I have been fighting my entire life to unravel my masculinity from his. As my wife and I pull into my parents’ driveway, all I can think about is how to be a man in this impossible situation, how not to be my father.
In my wallet, I carry a photo of Frank D’Amico, Lynette’s father. He’s on a Navy ship during the Korean War, in a white ­T-shirt, his skinny arms and chest wrapped in another private’s arms, two buddies at sea. I didn’t really know how to describe a good man until I met Frank. And I never knew what a father did until he became mine.
In 2009, right after Lynette’s mother died, we moved from Minneapolis to Chicago — two hours from my parents’ home in Elkhart and several hours from Frank and his home in St. Louis. Frank was our first visitor. He came too soon. Our furniture hadn’t arrived. There was nowhere to sit, just a guest mattress on the floor, and food had to be ordered in, which violated our Italian hospitality values. The windows in our old bungalow had been painted shut, and I hadn’t had time to pry them open. The air in the house was thick and “foggy,” as Lynette would complain. I was preoccupied with starting a new job and impatient and agitated, but Frank insisted on coming. He took us to an old Italian supper club, and midway through dinner leaned in to the table to say, “I had to see for myself that you were both O.K., that you moved out of happiness and not grief.” Then he paid the bill.
Frank came several more times to see the theater I was making, even though he didn’t especially like live theater or going out in the evening. But he loved me. He loved Lynette even more.
Frank was solid ground under my feet. He wasn’t powerful or persuasive or ambitious or frightening or certain like most of the men in my life. He was curious, quiet and attentive. When Lynette was on her own and broke, Frank bought her a Ford Escort. She insisted on a wagon. He kept saying, “What does a young, beautiful woman want with a wagon?” He set up a payment plan for her to pay him back, and every check she sent him, he put in a savings account. He never said what he was doing; he just sent her a check for the entire amount when the car was paid off. When Lynette and I had to sell our house in Chicago for another job move, Frank knew we had taken a hit in the financial crisis. I wouldn’t tell him how much we lost on the Chicago bungalow, but one day a check for $8,000 came in the mail, just the right amount to make us whole. Frank moved slow and steady and with purpose. He wasn’t anything like the other men I knew.
Frank never made more than $40,000 a year. In his second career as an investment broker, his advice to Lynette and me in early 2008 was to buy Ford Motor Company stock. Frank wasn’t handy. He couldn’t fix anything. He wasn’t athletic, he never exercised and he never watched sports. He woke up every morning until he was 80 and put on a suit and tie and went to work. He was beloved by his co-­workers and his clients, mostly retired widows. He was thrifty. His purpose in life was to leave money for Lynette and her two brothers, and he denied himself to save for his kids.
Born in 1927, he was nothing like his own brothers. One brother was a furniture salesman who aspired to be a writer. He wrote a book that he tried to persuade Lynette to edit and publish by stuffing $6,000 into her purse after we visited one Thanksgiving. The book was titled “Women Are Bitches,” and $6,000 wasn’t enough. The youngest brother was a devout racist — I couldn’t be in his house after Barack Obama was elected president. The third brother I never heard say two words, because he wouldn’t speak to a masculine-­looking woman.
Frank and I first met in 1998, he a Republican and I a Democrat, and we constantly argued politics. A fiscal conservative, he was anxious about his money and taxes and voted for George W. Bush in 2000. He liked to get me revved up about a proposed tax cut or some union negotiation. I always came armed with statistics on the disproportionate ratio of military spending to social programs. We had deep ideological differences, and we took pleasure in our time together trying to persuade the other to be more moderate. I think on an occasion or two we might have even influenced each other’s thinking. Frank’s politics were never about people or groups.
I am sure Frank harbored racist perceptions and beliefs and some homophobia, and he had conventional notions about women, but he took people on their own terms, and he made judgments based on experience, not preconceptions. Lynette’s mom called me “the landlady” for the first several years Lynette and I were together. She didn’t want to accept that Lynette would not have a wedding and children with a man. But Frank treated me as I saw myself, as someone he trusted to care for his daughter. “She has a Ph.D.,” he told everyone, as if that made me an expert on everything. He was an older white man who thought I knew more than he did on some subjects. We talked about finances and cars and his time as a radio operator on a transport ship in the Navy. I begged him to give up his yellowing white Rockports. “You’re good-­looking, Frank,” I said. “No reason to dress like an old man.” I helped him mow his oversize lawn. When we met up with him in Buffalo, where his brothers lived, he always insisted I drive. We watched Turner Classic Movies together — we both loved old Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers dance numbers. He knew I was Lynette’s husband.
In the last few years of his life, Frank was a man divided in two. He started watching Fox News on a loop and saying things I didn’t know how to engage. He and his brother would sit in front of the TV in Buffalo, and his brother would say, over and over, that Obama (using a racial expletive to refer to him) should be killed, while Frank sat silently. Our debates turned to shouting matches, mostly me yelling because Frank never yelled. This was a man who had over more than a decade taught me about goodness. Frank had come to our gay wedding and wept with joy. When he was in a rehab facility in St. Charles, Mo., after breaking his hip, he said, beaming, to the nurses: “This is my daughter and her wife. They just got married.” His next line might be, “Obama isn’t an American citizen,” and that line would sit right next to his explanation that he gave away his winter coat because the son of a nurse at the hospital where he volunteered every week needed one.
We are all contradictions. We are all doubling as ourselves. Lynette and I doubling as queer and straight now. I am doubling as someone who only ever felt like a boy and a man but knows viscerally the harsh realities of living as a girl and a woman. I love my father in some abstract way, and I can’t be near him.
I see all the flaws of men, all the ways their fragility makes them dangerous and powerful and dismissive and sure that they know it all, and I love being a man. I love masculinity, and I love hanging out with men. My body is a contradiction. I feel a fiery rage toward men for treating me like a woman, for making women seem crazy and emotional and inferior, for what men did to me. I feel so much joy living in a man’s body, my natural physicality, and I am trying to find a path toward becoming a good man.
My father is increasingly anxious as he faces his own end times. All he can think about is the next doctor appointment, the rash on his back, the oxygen level on his tank, the money my mom spent at the grocery store to buy the expensive ice cream she likes. He does not double for me during his illness. I can see only one thing, and I am trying to distance myself from him to escape what Polly knows in order to create Carl. We are in his home. He has had a stent put in for each kidney and has a catheter. He has cancer. I am in the TV room with him. We have just had a brief argument about the black men arrested in Starbucks. He thinks the woman had the right to call the police. He is in the blue leather recliner and is watching “Tales of Wells Fargo,” a western TV series that ran from 1957 to 1962. He watches it every single day at 5:30 p.m. The catheter is leaking through his diaper. “I’m miserable. I’m so miserable. I can’t do this.”
I lift him out of the recliner with one arm, get him to his feet. I hold the catheter. He is mostly peeing blood now. I get him into the bathroom. I put on latex gloves, release the lever on the catheter and drain the blood into a measuring cup, record the cubic centimeters. I put a towel underneath him, and I pull down his soaked pajamas, and I pull one swollen foot and leg out at a time. I pull down the diaper, and blood and urine drips out all over the towel.
I get a washcloth and soak it in warm water. First, I wash his face, gently moving the cloth over his forehead and cheeks and eyelids, underneath his neck and his arms. I rinse the cloth, and I wipe his penis and in between his thighs and down his legs. He doesn’t have his partial teeth in, and he is drooling all over the top of my shaved head, the drool running down the left side of my forehead. He hums the entire time, except when he says, “Now that you’re my son, it’s O.K. for you to do this.”
Now that I’m his son.
As I wipe the drool off my face and situate my father back into his recliner, I’m hit with the terrible grief, the unresolvable loss. My only chance of becoming a good man hinges on not becoming my father’s son.