Lawmakers Got Lurid Accusations About a State Senator. From His Brother.
ALBANY, N.Y. — Before the people’s business officially began last week, before New York State legislators gaveled in for the 2020 session, lawmakers were first forced to confront an unusual matter.
Over the past few days, state senators had received a rambling 13-page letter accusing a Bronx Democratic senator of a series of appalling crimes ranging from child molestation to drug trafficking.
To make matters more bizarre — even by Albany standards — the letter was sent from prison by the senator’s incarcerated brother.
The senator, Luis R. Sepúlveda, chose to confront the allegations with his Democratic colleagues on Wednesday, telling them in a private conference that the accusations were complete falsehoods.
The matter was a peculiar distraction from an otherwise momentous week in Albany, with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo delivering his annual State of the State speech and lawmakers — fresh off a legislative session that many said was historic for the number of laws passed — returning to the State Capitol.
After word of the letter emerged, Mr. Sepúlveda said that the effort amounted to extortion, even though it did not specify any demands or threats.
“All I would say is that I will never give in to extortionists, no matter if they are related to me by blood or not,” he said in an interview on Thursday. “This is clearly an attempt to extort, and it’s unfortunate that someone put that out there without speaking to us first, but I have to deal with the consequences.”
The allegations made against Mr. Sepúlveda, who became a senator in April 2018 after nearly six years in the Assembly, were levied by his older brother, Jose Elias Sepúlveda.
The older brother was sentenced to life in prison in 1998 after being convicted of conspiracy to import and to possess with an intent to distribute 10,251 kilograms of marijuana, 206 kilograms of cocaine and hashish oil over a period of about 17 years, according to court documents.
The letter’s large white envelope, which carried a warning of compromising evidence against the state senator, had a return address for a medium-security federal correction facility in Coleman, Fla.
Inside were unsubstantiated claims that the senator had molested a young relative, helped his brother smuggle marijuana from Jamaica in the 1980s and helped him break into their aunt’s safe in Florida to steal $130,000.
“Let me make it clear that these allegations are unequivocally false,” Mr. Sepúlveda, 55, said in a statement Thursday night. “Unfortunately, my brother is currently in a difficult place in his life. But despite his situation, he still enjoys the love and support of my family and I.”
The letter included accusations via signed affidavits from other family members. But Gloria Reyes, the older brother’s former longtime girlfriend, said that he had pressured family members over the years to sign affidavits, sometimes blank ones, to back up his claims about his drug case and about the senator.
Ms. Reyes said the elder brother wrongly believed the senator had the political clout to intervene in his case and reduce his prison sentence. She said he was angry that the senator had not returned his many calls and vowed to “destroy Ricky,” referring to the senator by his nickname.
“He’s desperate,” Ms. Reyes said in Spanish. “He has a very powerful imagination.”
The senator’s brother, 64, has previously sought to challenge his sentence, claiming that he was wrongly convicted.
An affidavit supposedly signed in 2017 by his father, Caleb Sepúlveda Sr., and filed in Federal District Court in Florida, said that the father neglected him as a child, deprived him of an education and gave him thousands of dollars to operate a marijuana business as his “frontman.”
“Jose has done my prison time and his, and I am pleading for his release,” the father wrote in the affidavit. “Now I’m 83 years old and looking back I realize the harm I cost my son Jose and how I manipulated and brainwash him, since he was a child, all for my own monetary profits and selfish reasons.”
But Ms. Reyes said Mr. Sepúlveda Sr. had been senile and bedridden for years. She speculated that the affidavit might have been forged or that he might not have known what he was signing.
The package sent to elected officials also included a photocopy of a handwritten letter that the senator had penned in Spanish to his incarcerated brother on the Legislature’s letterhead in 2014. The senator promised to visit him in prison soon and urged him to “keep the faith.”
“You have abandon me here with no communication or your help,” the incarcerated brother wrote in his letter. “The only evidence I possess to show the world, is the one letter I have received from you in 23 years, and it was a lie.”