The Opening Arguments Marathon at the Impeachment Trial
To the Editor:
Re “Democrats Turn Focus to Trump’s Intentions in Ukraine Aid Freeze” (front page, Jan. 24):
Listening to Adam Schiff and other House managers over the past few days has restored hope that, although they are fated to lose the impeachment battle, we will win the war to return to decency. Their cogent truth- and fact-based explanations leave no doubt as to why the removal of President Trump is necessary for the maintenance of our ongoing experiment in democracy. Their lesson may fall on deaf ears in the Senate, but the American public is listening.
Tom Miller
Oakland, Calif.
To the Editor:
In electrical conduction there is such a thing as “overload,” when a surge of current beyond a circuit’s ability to respond to it can render that circuit inoperable.
The combined impeachment deliberations and the coverage of the Democratic primaries seem to be approaching “political overload” for some of us.
Let’s hope that this morning-to-midnight flow of political clashes doesn’t “overload” voters with so much confusion that they become politically “inoperable” in November and freeze in place the status quo.
David L. Evans
Cambridge, Mass.
To the Editor:
Because I have taught for some 50 years, I’d like to offer some pedagogical advice to those arguing both for and against President Trump’s removal from office.
First, do not lecture for 24 hours before a Senate audience that is commanded to stay silent. This is a sure recipe for boredom.
Second, do not insult those whose minds you hope to change. Those who worry about Mr. Trump’s conduct are not simply sore losers who can’t believe they lost the 2016 election. Nor are most Trump supporters anything other than hardworking folks who worry about the country’s future.
Finally, cut back the quotes from the founding fathers. The issues here simply involve Mr. Trump’s phone call to the president of Ukraine.
Any judgments should be made after, not before, the opposing lawyers have had their say.
Mr. Trump’s trial is a test for our Congress and the voting public. I hope we pass it.
Peter Frost
Williamstown, Mass.
To the Editor:
If witnesses are permitted, the Bidens must testify because Donald Trump should be convicted. It would not be fair to allow us Democrats to call witnesses who we think are important and not to encourage the Republicans to call the ones who they believe will help make their case: Joe and Hunter Biden. The simplest calculations are usually the correct ones. Besides, the appearance of being unfair is a loser’s game in the court of public opinion.
Michael Silberbach
Lake Oswego, Ore.
To the Editor:
Senate Republicans should realize that if Donald Trump is convicted and removed from office, they won’t have to worry that he will make sure they are “primaried” in the coming elections.
Martha D. Trowbridge
New York