How to Enjoy Snowflakes
“It’s easier to appreciate snowflakes when you don’t have a shovel in your hand,” says Kenneth G. Libbrecht, a professor of physics at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, Calif., who studies snowflake morphology by growing ice crystals in his laboratory. Go out in the snow with dark clothing on and let a few flakes fall on your coat. Peer at them through a magnifying glass. Don’t assume you’ll see the archetypal, branching-star type called stellar dendrites, which require temperatures around minus 15 degrees Celsius. To see those in the wild, Libbrecht travels to a small town in northeastern Ontario. “The people there think I’m crazy,” he says.
A snowflake takes shape when swirling molecules of vaporized water freeze into symmetrical, six-sided crystals, a process that typically takes 30 minutes. Its exact form will depend on the humidity and temperature during its fall. Libbrecht categorizes snowflakes into 35 basic types. His favorites, capped columns, look like empty thread spools. For prime snowflake conditions, go out on a cold, windless night with low-slung clouds. Libbrecht’s snowflake hot spots include Fairbanks, Alaska, and Hokkaido, Japan. Utah and Vermont get good crystals, but most states are too warm. “The snow just glops together,” he says.
Those who grew up in cold climates tend to be the ones who most admire his snow-crystal chambers. “You get a visitor from Canada, and they’re like, ‘Wow,’ ” he says. For much of his career, Libbrecht, who is from North Dakota, focused on other things, like gravitational waves. But as he got older, he let the other stuff go. His singular focus has led to some unlikely opportunities, like when he was the snowflake consultant for Disney’s “Frozen.”
Years ago, Libbrecht set up a Google news alert for the word “snowflake,” which generated daily updates about ice crystals and an occasional news item about the town of Snowflake, Ariz. More recently it has generated a litany of derogatory slurs and alt-right political rants, which saddens and perplexes him. “I look forward to the day when a snowflake can be a snowflake again,” he says.