Impeachment Then and Now: What Three Presidential Sites Can Teach Us
The first president to be impeached stood in the way of Reconstruction, fired a Cabinet member without the then-required Senate approval and brought “disgrace, ridicule, hatred, contempt and reproach” on Congress. The second who faced impeachment covered up the wiretapping and break-in at the opposing party’s headquarters. The third disgraced president had an affair with a White House intern, and then lied about it.
We visited the presidential museums, libraries and sites dedicated to the three former presidents who faced impeachment — Andrew Johnson, Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton. We talked to visitors about the impeachment facing President Trump, and whether those earlier episodes have something to say about the proceedings unfolding in Washington.
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. — The big banner adorning the William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum advertises an innocuous pop-culture exhibit — “THE ’90s ARE BACK!” — though it seemed to do double-duty, in recent days, as a commentary on the familiar drama unfolding in Washington.
The 1998 impeachment of Mr. Clinton, and his subsequent acquittal by the Senate, is addressed in the second-floor permanent exhibit dedicated to Mr. Clinton’s eight years in office, though the story is told from a decidedly pro-Clinton perspective.
Most of the discussion of impeachment is confined to one of about a dozen information-stuffed alcoves that line a grand hall on the second floor of the long, light-filled contemporary building on the banks of the Arkansas River. Impeachment is dissected in the alcove titled, “The Fight for Power.”
In the 1990s, it informs visitors, “it became common right-wing practice not just to attack Democrats’ ideas, but also their motives, morals, and patriotism. The civility that once prevailed on Capitol Hill gave way to character assassination.”
Some of the mechanics of impeachment and the trial are recounted, and there is a brief mention of Monica Lewinsky — the White House intern with whom Mr. Clinton had an affair. The two articles of impeachment he faced were for perjury related to his statements about the affair in a civil sexual harassment lawsuit, and obstruction of justice.
Mr. Clinton, on an audio track, can be heard apologizing “for what I said and did to trigger these events.” Another voice calls the impeachment “a wholly excessive use of just raw political power.”
Randall B. Woods, a history professor at the University of Arkansas, said that the Clinton and Trump impeachments were similar “in that they’re both perceived as politically driven — but that’s where the similarity ends.”
“I think in the present situation you have circumstances that are far more important,” said Mr. Woods, who has written extensively about United States politics, policy and the presidency. “I think you have a situation where you have demonstrable abuse of power — that’s what the impeachment clause of the constitution was meant to prevent, to deal with.”
On Friday, Mr. Trump’s impeachment was on the mind of many visitors to the Clinton library.
Joe Schwartzhoff, a master plumber visiting from Decorah, Iowa, said he hoped that a future Trump library would be “open” about the fact that he was impeached, and present the drama from both sides, “so if this comes up again, mistakes aren’t made, proper procedures are done, so it’s a working tool, as well as history.”
But Mr. Schwartzhoff, a Trump supporter, said a future library should also be balanced with what he said were Mr. Trump’s many achievements — especially his immigration crackdowns — despite the intense pushback he has faced from Democrats.
“I will give Trump a lot of credit,” he said. “For somebody they’ve fought every day since the day he was elected — even before he went into office — he’s gotten some things done, amazingly. And I don’t know how.”
Mr. Schwartzhoff, 61, said he was inclined to vote for Mr. Trump again. His wife, Kathy Schwartzhoff, also 61 but not a Trump supporter, agreed with her husband that Mr. Trump did not seem to have committed an offense that merits his removal. “I’m not 110 percent sure that he has done impeachable items” she said.
Tremain Levels, 36, of Dallas, said that it was difficult to say what a future Trump library should do with the impeachment drama. Many questions about the Ukraine scandal remain unanswered, he said. “When you study the Clinton impeachment, with Clinton there’s a deposition, there’s a taped deposition, there is audio of him discussing the impeachment.”
Mr. Levels, who voted for Hillary Clinton and works for a financial services company, said that it was harder to know what was going on in the case of Mr. Trump, given his administration’s refusal to produce witnesses and documents. “In order to get all sides of this particular impeachment,” he said, “there has to be some transparency.”
YORBA LINDA, Calif. — At the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum, visitors gaze upon the crude, toothpick-sized instruments that precipitated the downfall of the nation’s 37th chief executive: thin metal lock picks carried by the Watergate burglars on June 17, 1972.
They stand and listen to the eerie clicks on a section of White House audiotapes that were suspiciously erased, known now as the 18-and-a-half-minute gap. They press buttons that light up the places in the Nixon Oval Office where the telephones were tapped and the hidden microphones were located. They stare at a copy of the $25,000 cashier’s check that linked Mr. Nixon’s re-election committee to the Watergate burglars and read boldfaced panels with pull-no-punches passages: “In three different conversations, the president approved the use of the C.I.A. to obstruct the F.B.I.’s criminal investigation.”
Steps from Mr. Nixon’s final resting place and his childhood home, the darkest moments of his presidency — the Watergate scandal that brought him to the brink of impeachment and forced him to resign — are laid museum-quality bare.
As the question of whether to remove Mr. Trump from office consumes Washington, the Nixon library and museum in Southern California, about 12 miles northeast of Disneyland, provides an unlikely lesson in impeachment studies — the most divisive issue in the land can, with time, age rather gracefully from news to history.
“I’d say we’re very upfront about it,” said Jim Byron, executive vice president of the Richard Nixon Foundation, which operates the library and museum with the National Archives. “It’s part of the Nixon story. It’s just not the only part. What you’ll see when you go through the museum is his full life.”
Only three American presidents have ever been formally impeached — Andrew Johnson, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Trump. Mr. Nixon resigned in 1974 before his impeachment moved forward. The House Judiciary Committee approved three articles of impeachment against him for abuse of power, obstruction of justice and contempt of Congress, but the full House never voted to adopt the articles after he resigned, so there was never a Senate trial.
The library is one of the busiest tourist attractions and meeting venues in Orange County, long a bastion and national symbol of California conservatism. That aura took a hit in 2016, when Mrs. Clinton beat Mr. Trump and became the first Democratic presidential candidate to win Orange County since Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1936.
The Nixon campus, which includes the library, museum, his boyhood home and the burial sites of both Mr. Nixon and the former first lady, Pat Nixon, attracts about 150,000 visitors annually.
On Friday, visitors said they appreciated the museum’s handling of Mr. Nixon’s impeachment legacy, saying that they hoped a future Trump library would take the same approach and avoid playing down this part of Mr. Trump’s presidency, regardless of the ultimate outcome in the Senate trial.
“No matter how it turns out, it’s still a part of history,” said Jeanie De Vos, 66, who lives in Sheldon, Iowa, and was at the museum with her husband, daughter and two grandchildren. “And you can’t do away with history.”
A mix of Democrats, Republicans and independents were at the museum on Friday. Some supported the Democratic effort to impeach Mr. Trump (“We’re not fans,” one man delicately put it), while others said they backed the president. But both critics and supporters agreed that they thought about the Trump impeachment as they looked at the Nixon exhibits.
“All the cover-up and denial to start with, that’s the first thing that went through my mind,” said Shirley Evans, 74, a retired accountant who lives in Northfield, Minn., and who was visiting the museum with her husband, Jim, after vacationing in Palm Springs, Calif.
One young visitor, a 14-year-old student named Amaree who attends the Letha Raney Intermediate School in nearby Corona and was part of an eighth-grade field trip to the museum, said he learned at the museum about both the good and the bad in the Nixon presidency. The balance mattered, he added.
“I want them to show the bad things,” he said. “Kids need to know everything that is going on.”
GREENEVILLE, Tenn. — Andrew Johnson, the first American president to be impeached, doesn’t exactly have a presidential library as much as a collection of buildings that are dedicated to his legacy. The National Park Service maintains the site, which includes his former home and a cemetery. A commanding statue stands nearby.
Five large panels on a small stretch of a wall at the visitor’s center asks: Why Was Johnson Impeached? The answer: An increasingly hostile disagreement between Congress and Mr. Johnson over Reconstruction policies.
Mr. Johnson, who became president after the assassination of Abraham Lincoln in 1865, wanted more leniency for the South, and the “radical majority in Congress saw the South as conquered territory to be remodeled by the government.” The display includes voting boxes — guilty and not guilty — where museum-goers could decide for themselves whether he should be removed.
On Friday morning, Joe Aldridge, 43, who has been impersonating Mr. Johnson in full Civil War-era costume for more than 10 years, dropped by the visitor’s center. Evoking Mr. Johnson, he said, reminded him of what he likes about Mr. Trump, whose impeachment trial he has been following on the radio.
“What do I like about Johnson? He told it like it was,” Mr. Aldridge said. “Trump is the same as Johnson. He did nothing bad. He’s just trying to help people.”
The judgment of history has not been kind to Mr. Johnson; he had often been depicted as a clumsy and uncompromising figure who was elevated to the presidency at a tragic moment in America, and who was far more partial to the defeated Southern states than to the rights of the newly freed black people of the South.
But Greeneville — a small town of about 15,000 residents, where Mr. Johnson married, served as alderman and briefly as its mayor — claims him with some pride. There’s an Andrew Johnson Bank, an Andrew Johnson Inn and an Andrew Johnson Golf Club. Another site, at Tusculum University, a liberal arts college founded in 1794, holds his library, a small collection of books that are mostly government printings of records and documents.
Looking at the impeachment display, Timothy E. Massey, a historian in Greene County, said Mr. Johnson was impeached for one clear reason: “Johnson was ensnared.”
“The radical Republicans saw Johnson as in their way,” he said. “He was the roadblock that stood in the way of overtaking the South and making it a dictatorship.”
But for Peter Noll, an associate professor of Public History and Museum Studies at Tusculum University, the answer was more complicated. Mr. Johnson was impeding Congressional legislation that would have protected freed slaves, a move that was deeply threatening to the former planter class and to Mr. Johnson’s own political ambitions, he said.
Nathan Delph, 33, and his husband Tyler Goodman, 28, were in Tennessee on Friday from Charleston, S.C., visiting family, and went to the historic site out of curiosity. Mr. Delph, who once considered himself a Republican but voted as a Democrat for the first time in 2016, said he had become increasingly worried about the country under Mr. Trump, and was obsessed with his impeachment trial.
“He records it, and watches after work,” said Mr. Goodman, who works as a letter carrier. “I was cleaning upstairs last night and I heard it playing, and I was like, ‘Oh, my God, that again.’”