In Disney Races, Cartoonish Gear Is the Front-Runner
Welcome to the Running newsletter! Every Saturday morning, we email runners with news, advice and some motivation to help you get up and running. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
Dear Readers,
When Michael Gabriel ran his first race at Walt Disney World, in 2016, he did so because he liked Disney and had been looking for a marathon to run in January. When he saw that people run these races in costume, he knew he had to try it.
Now Gabriel, 33, who manages a technical support team at the email marketing service MailChimp, is a regular at the four-race series put on by RunDisney every year. He has run as a variety of Disney characters, among them Donald Duck, Walt Disney, Baloo from “The Jungle Book,” Belle from “Beauty and the Beast,” and Princess Leia.
He’s no slouch of a runner, either. He won the 2018 Princess 5K dressed as Rapunzel, and in 2019 ran 12 marathons and several shorter races in 12 months, setting his marathon personal record of three hours, 13 minutes, 16 seconds. He also raises money for She’s the First, a charity that helps provide education opportunities to girls in areas of the world where their access to education is limited.
Gabriel is currently in Orlando for the 2020 Walt Disney World Marathon race series, which included a 5K on Thursday, 10K on Friday, a half marathon on Saturday and a full marathon Sunday — and yes, he’s running all four. He’s joined runners he met at previous races to do themed, group costumes this year. So far, he’s been Horace Horsecollar as part of a group of classic Disney characters, the Prince as part of Snow White and the Seven Dwarves (and friends), and Darkwing Duck from “Duck Tales” as part of a Disney ducks group. His marathon costume is a surprise (he’ll post photos on his Instagram account, @runthesmallworld, from Saturday and Sunday’s races).
I caught up with him earlier this week, when he was on his way from his home in Atlanta to the Sunshine State. Answers have been edited and condensed.
Jen A. Miller: How long have you been running?
Michael Gabriel: I ran cross country in high school but didn’t like it. I didn’t pick it back up again until 2014 because a friend asked me to run the Atlanta 10 Miler with her. I still didn’t take it very seriously, but in 2015, a different friend asked me to put my name into the New York City Marathon lottery with her. I got in and she didn’t. But I got hooked. Before I even ran that first one, I’d signed up for marathons two and three.
JAM: And marathon two was the 2016 Disney Marathon.
MG: I didn’t know anything about RunDisney. I was just trying to find something around that time of year. I liked Disney and vaguely remembered somebody saying Disney had a marathon. I had no idea costumes were a thing.
JAM: When did you run your first Disney race in costume?
MG: Later in 2016, at the Wine and Dine Half Marathon Weekend. I signed up for the two course challenge — a 10K and half marathon, on two different days. I ran as Mickey Mouse for the 10K, and I was Aladdin for the half marathon.
JAM: What advice do you have for people who want to run in costume, especially in Florida?
MG: Really think about potential weather conditions. Star Wars Rival Run weekend — a 5K, 10K and half marathon — is in April, and I will generally be careful and try not to kill myself with costumes because it’s going to be hot. With the Disney Marathon, weather can be all over the place.
But do as I say, not as I do. I found I have a much higher tolerance for discomfort than some people. I also gauge within the first mile or so how much I have to slow down if it’s hot. The biggest thing is not expecting to run anywhere near what I would run in normal clothing. When I’m carrying props, those are as annoying as they look. But as long as I’m having fun, as long as others are entertained, I can push through anything.
Also, think about which parts of the costume are actually touching your skin because chafing is one thing you can’t do anything about.
JAM: Do you have any sewing experience? Some of your costumes are pretty elaborate.
MG: No, not at all! I’m a moderately creative person but I don’t consider myself artistic. I’m from Atlanta, where we have Dragon Con, a huge annual multigenre convention. I’ve done a few costumes for that. The standards are lower for running costumes because no one’s coming up to look at you super closely. It’s really a matter of figuring out what’s the minimum I have to do to make sure it holds together. If I can make it look about right and pick one or two details that set it apart from another outfit, it comes together. For the Rapunzel costume, I made myself deal with the wig. I also had Rapunzel’s friend Pascal, a chameleon, on my shoulder.
JAM: Your costumes look like they might get pretty pricey.
MG: They range in price to put together. If I can assemble mostly from scratch, I can get away with $40 to $50, but some have been upward of $200 accounting for purchased pieces and props I would have had no reason to buy otherwise.
JAM: Were you surprised to win when you ran as Rapunzel for the 2018 Princess 5K?
MG: I had been in the hospital earlier that week from an allergic reaction. I hadn’t slept much the previous couple of days before the race. I was thinking “I’m going to run this at about my half marathon pace, because I don’t know what my body can do right now.” It was hot and humid, too, but about half of the way, I realized I was by myself. The bike pacer and I just started chatting, and I kept looking at my watch and wondering where people were. I had no particular interest in winning. I kept shouting jokes back at the volunteers and staff and giving them high fives.
When I finally realized I was going to win, I had no idea what to do. I’ve never even seen the tape at the end of the finish line. It’s a really funny moment. I did it in about 21 minutes. It’s a respectable time and just a weird confluence of events: I went out, happened to be in costume and no one went fast.
—————
Have you ever run in costume? What are your tips for those who want to try it? Let me know! I’m on Twitter @byjenamiller.
Run Well!
Jen A. Miller
Author, “Running: A Love Story”
Forward it to your friends, and let them know they can sign up here.