Lesson of the Day: ‘Before the Liberation of Auschwitz, a March of Misery’
Featured Article: “Before the Liberation of Auschwitz, a March of Misery” by Marc Santora
On Jan. 27, 1945, Soviet forces liberated Auschwitz, a concentration camp in Poland where 1.3 million people, many of whom were Jewish, were enslaved — and 1.1 million among them systematically murdered — during the Holocaust. In the weeks before liberation, the Nazis forced 56,000 weakened prisoners out of the camps in the dead of winter, on what are now known as death marches.
In this lesson, you will learn more about these forced marches through oral history videos and a recent Times article.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum strives to document the memories of Holocaust survivors, and it has created a series of oral history videos that speak about the death marches. Watch one or two of the following brief videos:
Fritzie Weiss Fritshall describes the death march from Auschwitz.
Sam Itzkowitz describes a death march from Landsberg, a subcamp of Dachau, to the Bavarian Alps.
Lilly Appelbaum Malnik describes a death march from Auschwitz to Bergen-Belsen.
Steven Springfield describes a 1945 death march from Burggraben in the Stutthof camp system.
Now, reflect on what you heard:
Read the article, then answer the following questions:
1. The article starts with a description of a monument: “But there are only four names. Another 21 people are identified by their inmate numbers. And 17 have never been identified.” Why is this important? What does this illuminate about the struggle to piece together parts of Holocaust history?
2. Why has it been hard to document the death marches before liberation? What are some of the theories about why they occurred?
3. What does Zofia Posmysz remember about the time before and during the death march? What do Holocaust scholars observe about the memories of survivors?
4. What propelled Jan Stolarz, a retired miner, to lead a memory march?
5. What was Bernard Halat’s experience witnessing the death marches? What was the moment of hope that he remembered seeing?
Option 1: Reflect
The death marches of 1945 took place 75 years ago. The people who somehow survived those forced marches, as well as the people who witnessed them, are getting older. Perhaps most have already died. Mr. Santora writes:
And he ends the article with the following sentence:
Does it matter that soon, as time passes, there will no longer be any firsthand witnesses who survived what happened during the Holocaust — or saw them? What does that mean for the purpose of recording history? What does it mean for the power of teaching future generations about a dark past? What relevance, if any, does that unavoidable reality have for preventing future genocides?
Option 2: Share Your Opinion
After the camps were liberated, many Holocaust survivors started to repeat: Never again. The phrase has come to represent a universal goal to prevent all future genocides. Institutions like the United Nations were created to guard against a repeat of such barbarism. Educational programs were put in place to combat prejudice and racism.
Do you feel that 75 years after World War II ended the world is a much better place to prevent genocides? If you are interested in responding further, you can go to our Student Opinion: Do You Think the World Is Getting Closer to Securing the Promise of ‘Never Again’?