Day 10 of Trump’s Trial: The Anticlimax
Senator Lamar Alexander really knows how to drain the suspense from an impeachment fight, doesn’t he?
Friday was supposed to be the big showdown in the Senate’s trial of President Trump — the long-awaited skirmish over whether to call for new witnesses and documents. To hit the 51-vote threshold, four Republicans needed to vote “aye” with the Democrats.
The chances of this had seemed negligible until last Sunday, when The Times reported that, in a forthcoming book, John Bolton, the former national security adviser, shares that the president told him that the security aid for Ukraine was linked to Ukraine announcing the corruption inquiries Mr. Trump sought.
Since a central piece of the president’s defense has been to complain about the dearth of witnesses who spoke directly with the president about Ukraine, the revelations cranked up the heat on Senators to hear from Mr. Bolton. Mr. Alexander was considered one of the Republicans most likely to grow a spine and cross the aisle.
This was a misjudgment. Thursday night, Mr. Alexander released a brief, self-justifying statement declaring that he saw “no need for more evidence” since it was clear from the existing information — which the Senate had “spent nine long days considering” — that the president’s actions had been “inappropriate.”
Inappropriate but not impeachable, he clarified.
Well played, senator. Very well played.
Without Mr. Alexander, the path to 51 was prohibitively steep. This meant that, by the time Chief Justice John Roberts gaveled the trial into session shortly after 1 p.m. Friday, it was all over but the carping.
Aware that the end was nigh, the House impeachment managers gave it their all. They even had fresh material to work with. Earlier in the day, The Times reported new tidbits from Mr. Bolton’s book. It seems Mr. Trump had personally recruited Mr. Bolton for his Ukraine pressure campaign back in May, two months before the president’s infamous July 25 phone call with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. As Mr. Bolton tells it, multiple top aides were in the May meeting, including Pat Cipollone, the White House counsel now leading the president’s impeachment defense.
This was an awkward development on the very day that Mr. Cipollone was lecturing senators about how ridiculous it would be for them to seek Mr. Bolton’s testimony. House managers repeatedly cited the news as they pleaded with senators to continue their “quest for the truth.”
“Just as we predicted, and it didn’t require any great act of clairvoyance, the facts will come out,” warned Representative Adam Schiff, the lead House manager. “They will continue to come out.”
The defense team clearly felt little urgency to respond, using maybe 30 minutes of the two hours allotted them for arguments.
Why bother with more? Senate Republicans were in no mood to continue their quest for anything. The vote to consider witnesses failed 49 to 51, with only two Republicans, Utah’s Mitt Romney and Maine’s Susan Collins, breaking ranks.
Barring an unforeseen political earthquake, the Senate will vote to acquit the president on Wednesday.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.