New in Paperback: ‘The Schoolhouse Gate’ and ‘Ghost Wall’
THE SCHOOLHOUSE GATE: Public Education, the Supreme Court, and the Battle for the American Mind, by Justin Driver. (Vintage, $17.95.) Driver, a Yale law professor, surveys the history of legal controversies over students’ rights in public schools, including segregation, flag saluting and corporal punishment, which is still legal in 22 states. Our reviewer, Dana Goldstein, called the book “indispensable.”

THE PATCH, by John McPhee. (Picador, $17.) In this seventh essay collection McPhee looks at sports like fishing, football and golf, and also assembles a section he calls an “album quilt,” consisting of long and short fragments of “writing I have done that has not previously appeared in any book.” Craig Taylor wrote in these pages that McPhee “finds surprising poetry in the material at hand.”
BARRACOON: The Story of the Last “Black Cargo,” by Zora Neale Hurston. (Amistad, $16.99.) Hurston was a folklorist and anthropologist as well as a novelist, and this true story is based on her interviews in 1927 with Cudjo Lewis, an 86-year-old Alabama man who was the last living African forcibly transported to America aboard a slave ship. “The details he shared with Hurston are indelible,” The Times’s Parul Sehgal wrote.
THE LOST MAN, by Jane Harper. (Flatiron, $16.99.) This Australian crime thriller begins in the vast, scorching outback, where a dead cattle rancher’s body is found by his two estranged brothers. Suspicions grow as the family tries to figure out whether someone is responsible, and if so, who. Our reviewer, Charles Finch, called Harper “a prickly, smart, effective storyteller.”
THE MAN WITH THE SAWED-OFF LEG: And Other Tales of a New York City Block, by Daniel J. Wakin. (Arcade, $16.99.) Wakin, an editor on The Times’s obituaries desk, pieces together stories from a row of Riverside Drive townhouses, whose early-20th-century inhabitants included Duke Ellington, Marion Davies, Saul Bellow and a gangster amputee. Among today’s occupants are the Catholic order Opus Dei and a Buddhist church.
GHOST WALL, by Sarah Moss. (Picador, $16.) Silvie, the protagonist of Moss’s sixth novel, is a 17-year-old working-class girl coerced into joining her parents on a two-week re-enactment of Iron Age culture in the north of England. As the group’s behavior turns increasingly savage, she finds both menace and freedom. Our reviewer, Alyson Hagy, called it “a compact, riveting book.”