On-Demand Webinar: Writing Arguments With Help From Nicholas Kristof and the Times Op-Ed Page
In this 55-minute webinar, recorded live in Oct. 2017, the Times Op-Ed columnist Nicholas Kristof talks to teachers about the art of writing arguments that raise awareness about global issues like disease, poverty and illiteracy.
In addition, Learning Network editors and Kabby Hong, a high school English teacher, explain how you can use the Times Opinion section and the Learning Network to find mentor texts, analyze claims and evidence, help your students practice persuasive writing for a real audience, and more.
Finally, we discuss ways to weave the Learning Network’s annual Student Editorial Contest into your curriculum, no matter what you’re teaching.
10 Ways to Teach Argument-Writing With The New York Times
Original Webinar: You can watch the original, unedited webinar here and download a professional development certificate at the end. The webinar is free, but registration is required.
Nicholas Kristof, Op-Ed Columnist, The New York Times
Mr. Kristof has been a columnist for The New York Times since 2001. He grew up on a farm in Oregon, graduated from Harvard, studied law at Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar, and then studied Arabic in Cairo. He was a longtime foreign correspondent for The New York Times and speaks Chinese, Japanese and other languages.
Mr. Kristof has won two Pulitzer Prizes for his coverage of Tiananmen Square and the genocide in Darfur, along with many humanitarian awards such as the Anne Frank Award and the Dayton Literary Peace Prize.
With his wife, Sheryl WuDunn, he has written several books, most recently “A Path Appears” (September 2014) about how to make a difference. Their last book, “Half the Sky,” was a No. 1 best seller.
Mr. Kristof, who has lived on four continents and traveled to more than 150 countries, was The New York Times’s first blogger and has millions of followers across social media platforms.
Mr. Kristof and Ms. WuDunn are the parents of Gregory, Geoffrey and Caroline. Mr. Kristof enjoys running, backpacking and having his Chinese corrected by his children. Read his blog, On the Ground. Follow him on Google+, Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. His column appears every Sunday and Thursday.
Kabby Hong, English Teacher, Verona Area High School
Mr. Hong is an English teacher at Verona Area High School in Verona, Wisconsin. He has been teaching for 16 years in various grades from 8th grade all the way up to 12th grade. He is currently teaching 9th grade English, AP Language and Composition and an upper-level elective called Art of Persuasion.