‘Cane River’ Review: A Lost Treasure of Independent Cinema
“Cane River” is the first — and, alas, the only — fictional feature directed by Horace B. Jenkins, who died shortly after completing it in 1982. The film’s rediscovery and restoration, leading to its belated theatrical debut this weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is a cause for celebration, although with an inevitable note of melancholy. Jenkins, who had worked mainly in documentary and public television (including on “Sesame Street”), was just 42 when he died, and to see this film, in a new 4k restoration that captures its original 35-millimeter beauty, is inevitably to reflect on the career that might have been.
The movie itself, which was lost until a few years ago, is relaxed, reflective and sweet, a romance shadowed by the complexities of history, race and politics that manages to be both modest and ambitious. The modesty is partly a matter of circumstances — “Cane River” was a low-budget, independent production shot on two locations in Louisiana, Natchitoches Parish and New Orleans — and partly a matter of style. Pursuing a plot that revolves around the fraught courtship of Peter (Richard Romain) and Maria (Tommye Myrick), Jenkins is more mellow than melodramatic, lingering over quiet moments and lovely landscapes rather than pushing the story from crisis to crisis.
The ambition is both artistic and intellectual. Peter, a very handsome college football star who has rejected a professional career, returns home to Cane River to ride horses and write poetry. Some of his verses find their way onto the soundtrack, by Leroy Glover and Phillip Manuel, over montages that are like naturalistic miniature music videos. He meets Maria while touring a local plantation once owned by his Creole landowning family.
The difference in their backgrounds — a difference of religion, class and color — gives their relationship a Romeo-and-Juliet quality. Maria’s skin is darker than Peter’s, she attends a Baptist church (he is Catholic), and her mother and brother don’t approve. Maria is about to start college in New Orleans, and her eagerness to escape Natchitoches matches Peter’s determination to stay in Cane River.
As they flirt and banter their way toward love and grapple with family matters, Jenkins embeds their emotional and domestic struggles in a lyrical contemplation of landscape that is, in turn, nested within a historical argument. When Peter first meets Maria, she is reading “The Forgotten People,” a scholarly work by Gary B. Mills on the history and sociology of “Cane River’s Creoles of Color.” The book is more than a prop; it’s a reference point, to be cited and quarreled with as Peter and Maria try to figure out who they are to each other.
Sometimes, Peter protests that the past shouldn’t have any bearing on their lives. Yes, some of his ancestors owned slaves, but that was a long time ago. And, besides, other ancestors were themselves enslaved. It’s complicated. He doesn’t think of himself as not black, but he also doesn’t like to think about race too much. He’d rather write his poems, and find other ways to impress the sometimes skeptical Maria.
For his part, Jenkins is careful not to flatten his characters into representatives of a narrowly defined community or point of view. The dominant feeling in “Cane River” is affection. It’s what the characters express toward one another (even at moments of high conflict) and what the director conveys, toward them and the landscape they inhabit, in every shot and musical cue.
The warmth of the film can feel like a political stance, an assertion of humanist ethical values that has a subtle but radical power. You can intuit something similar — an unstinting, sympathetic attention to the intimate matter of black lives — in Charles Burnett’s “Killer of Sheep” and in Kathleen Collins’s “Losing Ground,” another almost-lost jewel of early-‘80s African-American cinema. Like those films, “Cane River” invites a rethinking of American film history, and also, in its disarmingly offhand, uniquely charming manner — of other aspects of American history as well.