Four More Years of Trump?
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it Tuesdays and Thursdays.
On Wednesday, Donald Trump became the third American president to be acquitted of impeachment charges. The vote fell almost entirely along partisan lines, with one exception: Mitt Romney became the first senator in history to vote to remove a president of his own party, triggering both the ire of his Republican colleagues and the promise of a seven-figure book deal.
Mr. Trump’s acquittal came on the heels of a triumphalist State of the Union address and an uptick in his approval rating to 49 percent in one poll, the highest of his presidency. Here’s how people are taking stock of the moment and what it means for the 2020 election.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s worst fears about impeachment have seemingly come to fruition, says The Dispatch. According to the latest Gallup poll, Mr. Trump’s position has improved among both Republicans and independents since impeachment proceedings kicked off last fall. “Despite Trump’s many and obvious weaknesses,” The Dispatch says, “it’s clear that Democrats have their work cut out for them now more than ever as they endeavor toward taking back the White House this November.”
But Democrats had to pursue impeachment, and they pursued it as best they could, argues Robert Kuttner, the editor of The American Prospect. There’s no real evidence that it hurt the Democrats, he says, and it may still benefit them in congressional races. There are as many as 11 Republican senators who may face tough re-election campaigns, and “their vote to excuse Trump’s dictatorial behavior by refusing to convict will force them to answer extremely damaging questions during the campaign.”
Mr. Trump’s acquittal could even backfire, Jonathan Chait contends. The process was so stripped of legitimacy by Senator Mitch McConnell’s suppression of witnesses that it’s now seen as a cover-up, which means Democrats can continue their investigations. “They can keep digging into Trump from next week through fall, keeping public attention not only on his corruption and abuse of power but also on the Republican conviction that abuse of power is permissible,” he writes.
In his State of the Union speech, President Trump promoted his administration’s health care policies and claimed to have taken an “ironclad pledge” to protect patients with pre-existing conditions as part of his effort to realize “the most affordable, innovative and high-quality health care system on earth.”
The Trump administration’s health care agenda, however, has actually been malicious and incompetent, writes Catherine Rampell, a columnist at The Washington Post. “While Democrats debate the best path to universal health coverage,” she says, “Republicans appear to remain laser-focused on taking insurance away from as many Americans as possible.”
But the Democrats risk forfeiting their natural advantage on the issue because of internecine policy fights, Michelle Cottle, a member of The Times editorial board, has written. The primary field remains starkly divided over “Medicare for all,” a proposal that Ms. Cottle argues might alienate swing voters and is unlikely ever to pass. “Medicare for all has dominated the Democratic race for too long, serving neither the candidates nor the electorate well,” she writes.
Still, on this issue, all of the Democratic candidates compare favorably to Mr. Trump, writes Max Nisen. “Pete Buttigieg and Bernie Sanders, currently in the lead from the wreckage of the Iowa caucuses, offer different visions for the future of American health care,” he says, but “both at least aim to boost coverage, a goal that Trump is incapable of or uninterested in accomplishing.” And other polls have found that Medicare for all is highly popular with people who voted for Barack Obama in 2012 but shifted their support to Mr. Trump in 2016.
Mr. Trump is betting his electoral fortunes on the strength of the economy, Gretchen Frazee reports, which is always top of mind for voters. Political scientists and pollsters she talked to said it’s likely a good wager.
[Related: Will the strong economy make Trump win?]
But Democrats shouldn’t despair because the economy isn’t as strong as it looks, writes Steven Rattner. Unemployment may be low but wages have barely budged, job growth is weakest in “Trump country” and income inequality continues to grow. And whatever strength the economy does display, Mr. Rattner says, owes to Mr. Obama. “The fact remains that little of what Mr. Trump has done has helped the economy,” he writes. “The challenges for most Americans remain steep. Democrats need to keep reminding voters of those two simple facts.”
The activist Bree Newsome Bass tweeted:
After the Iowa caucuses, the Democratic Party is facing a legitimacy crisis, writes Sarah Jones.
This crisis redounds to Mr. Trump’s benefit, writes Eric Levitz, because the caucuses managed to confirm both progressives’ suspicions of establishment bias and swing voters’ skepticism about Democrats’ claims to superior professionalism. “In sum,” Mr. Levitz writes, “We are 24 hours into the 2020 campaign, and Democrats have already humiliated their party on national television, alienated their least reliable progressive supporters, demoralized their most earnest activists, and handed Trump’s campaign a variety of potent lines of attack.”
But in the end, the Democrats are still lucky to be facing Mr. Trump, Ross Douthat, a Times columnist, has written. Mr. Trump is not a Caesar or a king, Mr. Douthat says; he is a confidence man who exploited a decadent political system and got lucky. “Liberal hand-wringing about their structural disadvantages ignores the advantages that Trump keeps giving them,” he writes, including “the fact that in the best economy in 20 years he can’t stop making people hate him, can’t stop missing opportunities to expand his base, can’t stop forcing vulnerable Republicans to kiss his ring and thereby weaken their own prospects.” All the Democrats have to do, Mr. Douthat says, is beat him.
On Tuesday, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, following her decision to vote for Mr. Trump’s acquittal, said she believed he had learned “a pretty big lesson,” though she later clarified that it was “more aspirational on my part.” Indeed it was: On Thursday, the president launched into a profane tirade about his “evil,” “horrible,” “sleazebag” political enemies and his “bullshit” impeachment. (The Times contributor Wajahat Ali called it the stuff of “authoritarian regimes.”)
Do you have a point of view we missed? Email us at debatable@nytimes.com. Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
“What Will Finally Defeat Donald Trump?” [The New York Times]
Mr. Trump has become presidential — “but in the only way that Trump could,” Masha Gessen writes. [The New Yorker]
“Think Trump’s Learned a Lesson? Hahahaha” [The New York Times]
Here’s what readers had to say about the last debate: Are the Iowa caucuses finally canceled?
Bill from Iowa (via email): “I have participated in the Iowa Democratic caucus for every presidential election since 1984 and each and every time I have vowed to never participate again. They are boring, chaotic, sometimes dangerously crowded, and sometimes embarrassingly ill attended. They punish introverts, parents, and anyone who works. They torture the elderly and disabled and elevate the young, the loud and the bizarre. … I vow today never to participate again, assuming I can find some medication to control the guilt or the Iowa caucus dies after this year’s debacle.”
Beth from Iowa (via email): “I am a registered Iowa voter who watched this 2020 caucus debacle from Florida on CNN. I was left out of this process because there was no way for me to vote as an absentee. Many other Iowans were out of state as well because of the cold winter weather. … I believe that Iowa should relinquish this outdated and confusing procedure and instead participate in a national ranked-choice American primary election, all on the same day.”
The Times is holding a letter-writing competition for high school students. We invite you to submit a letter to the editor in response to a Times news article, editorial, column or Op-Ed in the last few days. A selection of favorites will be published.