How ‘The Irishman’ Maligns My Stepfather
Depersonalization is a dissociative disorder characterized by a sense of observing one’s self from outside one’s body. Those with the condition often report an experience akin to watching yourself in a movie. My 86-year-old stepfather, Chuckie O’Brien, does not suffer from depersonalization. But for more than half his life, 44 years, he has watched himself portrayed in news articles, books and motion pictures — most recently, in Martin Scorsese’s “The Irishman” — as someone he is not. The effect on his life has been devastating.
Chuckie was the most intimate associate of Jimmy Hoffa, the Teamsters union leader who famously disappeared from a suburban Detroit parking lot on July 30, 1975. Within two weeks, the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced its belief, based on circumstantial evidence, that Chuckie had abducted Mr. Hoffa from the parking lot through “force and violence.” Ever since, Chuckie’s involvement in the crime has been widely repeated and broadly accepted. The charge ruined his life. The government pursued him aggressively and often leaked falsehoods to the press to pressure him into cooperating. He was ostracized in the Teamsters union and lost many friends. And worst of all, at least to Chuckie, the allegation deeply stained his honor.
This is all tragic because the conventional wisdom about Chuckie is false. For decades, the F.B.I. has not suspected him of involvement in the disappearance. The circumstantial case against Chuckie fell apart long ago, and his known whereabouts on the fateful day make it practically impossible that he picked up Mr. Hoffa. Unfortunately, the government never made this information public. And so Chuckie’s innocence in one of the most notorious crimes of the 20th century remains mostly hidden, his guilt remains publicly presumed, his honor remains soiled.
It has been a bizarre experience, and a grim one, for Chuckie to read so many made-up things about himself over so many decades and not be able to do anything about it. “Everybody that’s written these books, they all surmise what happened,” he once explained to me. “They have no facts on them, they have no truth on them. The book gets printed and it goes out and they sell them, and that’s it.”
And now, to top it off, comes “The Irishman,” the latest and by far the greatest depiction of the false charge against my stepfather. Chuckie and I recently spoke about the film in Boca Raton, Fla., where he lives with my mother. He is not well physically. But his mind and his spirit are still sharp. And he has opinions about the movie.
Chuckie had long dreaded the release of the film. It is based on a book, “I Heard You Paint Houses,” that depicts the Teamsters official Frank Sheeran as Mr. Hoffa’s murderer and weaves Mr. Sheeran’s tale into the publicly known elements of the early F.B.I. theory of the case, including Chuckie’s alleged role in picking up Mr. Hoffa. Chuckie worried that Scorsese’s film would give his supposed involvement in the Hoffa disappearance a reality in popular culture that the prior books, headlines and movies did not. It turned out to be worse than he feared.
In “The Irishman,” Chuckie is played by Jesse Plemons. On the surface, the film tracks reality. There really were violent Teamsters union officials named Frank Sheeran (played by Robert De Niro) and Anthony Provenzano (Stephen Graham) and an eastern Pennsylvania crime boss named Russell Bufalino (Joe Pesci). Mr. Hoffa (Al Pacino) really did act self-destructively toward the mob in the mid-1970s as he tried but failed to regain control of his union. And the mob really did organize to knock him off.
But beyond these surface truths, and despite the “true crime” feel, the movie is high fiction. “One of the greatest fake movies I ever saw,” Chuckie told me.
For starters, while no one knows for sure how or by whom Mr. Hoffa was killed, we do know that it was not done in the way it is portrayed in the movie. Chuckie did not pick up Mr. Hoffa on July 30, 1975. And as I have written elsewhere, Frank Sheeran was almost certainly not in Detroit that day, and his implausible tale is belied by many other known facts.
And yet, as Chuckie expected, the fiction has become reality for the millions who have watched the film. Almost all of the dozens of people I have spoken to about the movie assume it is true — including that Chuckie drove a car with Mr. Sheeran in it to pick up Mr. Hoffa, and then delivered him to a house where Mr. Sheeran shot Mr. Hoffa.
Even more humiliating for Chuckie, and unexpectedly so, was the movie’s portrayal of Mr. Sheeran’s closeness to Mr. Hoffa — as his right-hand man during trials, as his troubleshooter in the office and as his intimate companion in union halls and in the evenings on the road.
Mr. Sheeran, whom Chuckie knew, did none of those things. He ran a Delaware Teamsters local and Mr. Hoffa had business dealings with him over the years, but the two men were not nearly as tight as the movie portrays. “The Irishman was never that close to Hoffa,” Chuckie told me. “He was a drunk, he couldn’t run a union, he got thrown out finally, and the only thing he would do was set a building on fire now and then.”
What Mr. Scorsese did, in effect, was to place Mr. Sheeran in Chuckie’s role in Mr. Hoffa’s life. It was Chuckie, not Mr. Sheeran, who for decades served as Mr. Hoffa’s “intimate companion, driver, bodyguard and special troubleshooter,” as the labor journalist Victor Riesel noted in the 1960s. Chuckie expected to be “tagged with the disappearance” in the movie, he told me. He did not expect Mr. Scorsese to appropriate his close relationship with Hoffa — the precious blood, sweat, tears and joy of a three-decade father-son relationship, the apex of Chuckie’s life — and give it to Mr. Sheeran for all the world to see and believe.
In the course of writing a book about my stepfather and Jimmy Hoffa, I discovered years of illegal F.B.I. surveillance recordings, through undisclosed microphone bugs, that listened in on Chuckie’s relationships with his mother, Sylvia; Hoffa’s wife, Josephine; several mob figures; and indirectly, Mr. Hoffa. Many of the recorded conversations were sordid or embarrassing. When the government leaked some of the transcripts in 1976, in an effort to pressure Chuckie and others, it not only violated his privacy; it also deprived him of the power to define and shape these relationships for himself and the world.
Mr. Scorsese has done something similar — not by listening in illegally and publishing humiliating truths, as the F.B.I. did, but by usurping Chuckie’s relationship with Mr. Hoffa, giving it to someone else and then broadcasting the untruth. The effect on Chuckie in both instances is the same. “I had no control,” he told me during our recent conversation. His control over his life, and the presentation of his life to the world, was snatched from him in ways he can never reverse.
“The Irishman” is not the only film to depict Chuckie’s life. The character Tom Hagen in “The Godfather” was a “rough model on a guy called O’Brien in Detroit who was like a son to Jimmy Hoffa,” according to Mario Puzo, who wrote the book on which that film was based. In “Absence of Malice,” Paul Newman’s character, Michael Gallagher, who was based in part on Chuckie, was falsely accused by the feds of involvement in the disappearance of a union official. And in the 1992 film “Hoffa,” Danny DeVito played Mr. Hoffa’s sidekick, Bobby Ciaro, a composite character based largely on Chuckie.
These movies depart in significant ways from Chuckie’s life, but none was as painful for him to watch as “The Irishman.” Chuckie has grown resigned to the lies about his life over the years. “Mr. Hoffa always taught me, you can’t change what they print,” he told me. “Put it on the side and keep going forward.” This is easier said than done, he also acknowledged. “It hurts, a lot, because you’re in the ring and getting the snot kicked out of you and you cannot fight back.”
But Chuckie’s portrayal in “The Irishman” as a “dim jackass” driving Mr. Hoffa to his death made him livid. “To see this happen, it just makes me so mad,” he told me. “I’d like to get hold of that Scorsese and choke him like a chicken. And then after I get through with him, I’d grab that other pipsqueak, the guy who played the Irishman.”
Chuckie is too frail for this to be a threat, and indeed he clearly did not mean it as a threat. It is an end-of-life cri de coeur by a man whose being has been enveloped, and destroyed, by demeaning public untruths that he lacked power to rectify.
“Here’s the way I look at movies,” Chuckie said, near the end of our conversation, after he had calmed down. “Hollywood could turn a monkey into a peanut. That’s their business. They don’t care about the truth. It’s entertainment. The guy who bought the ticket isn’t going to write a letter complaining about the truth if he is fascinated by the movie.”
Mr. Scorsese basically agrees. “I don’t really care about that,” he recently said when asked about the truth of his portrayal of Mr. Hoffa’s death. “The point is, it’s not about the facts.” For him, the film is about “the world” his characters inhabit and “the way they behave.”
Mr. Scorsese and Chuckie are right. Films grounded in history often take license with the facts to serve the larger narrative drama. It is a convention of the genre. But in the case of “The Irishman,” the convention serves as the capstone to my stepfather’s 44-year humiliation.