Kicked Up to ‘Hyperspeed’: How The Times Covers Impeachment
Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.
On a recent morning in Washington, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, a congressional reporter at The Times, began her day at the Capitol greeting a maintenance worker, who ended his shift by letting her into the press gallery at the Senate at 7:30 a.m. Nearly 14 hours later, she was still there to say hi again when he returned for his next shift.
Nicholas Fandos, another congressional reporter, has been working stretches of up to 18 hours. “I keep thinking it’s the wrong day,” he said. “I have just totally lost track.”
Emily Cochrane, a third member of the team, isn’t that different. “Too many hours to count,” she said.
For the past two weeks, long days (and nights) have been a way of life for those three and dozens of their colleagues. Covering the impeachment trial of a president, only the third such event in the nation’s history, is a marathon and continual series of sprints rolled into one. Through everything, The Times’s Washington bureau, working with other departments across the newsroom, has been taking a leading role.
Normally, six reporters cover Congress for The Times, and another six the White House. For impeachment, at various points, more than 20 reporters — including those with expertise on investigations, the State Department, politics, national security or other specialties — have contributed to round-the-clock updates as well as provided larger perspectives on what has been happening. They have been joined by dozens of editors, news assistants, photographers, designers and social media editors.
The product of their collective effort has taken many forms. Among them: what’s known internally as the “lede-all,” the single, overarching summary of the day’s events (frequently written by Mr. Fandos); the “Live Report,” an up-to-the-minute newsfeed; and “Trump on Trial” features, which can be a profile of a key player, a piece of analysis  or an enterprise story, which springs from an original idea. The bylines of congressional reporters, particularly Carl Hulse, and Peter Baker, chief White House correspondent, have appeared frequently under that banner.
A single article like the “Live Report” is often the product of a team of reporters. On Wednesday, the first item was posted at 7:04 a.m. The final posting went in at 11:18 p.m. In all, 16 reporters including Catie Edmondson, Michael D. Shear, and Maggie Haberman contributed to that feed, which consisted of 56 news items. Among the editors working with reporters late that night was Julie Hirschfeld Davis, the Washington bureau’s deputy editor who has been coordinating the day-to-day coverage under the direction of Elisabeth Bumiller, the bureau chief as well as an assistant managing editor. Last week, on the first day of opening arguments, Ms. Hirschfeld Davis was still working around 2 a.m.
“There aren’t enough hours in the day,” she said.
For the past two weeks, those days for her would frequently begin with a workout at 5:30 a.m. Then at about 7:30 a.m., she would typically start discussions with reporters, followed by a briefing with Ms. Bumiller. At 9:30, through videoconferencing, she would participate in The Times’s morning news meeting in New York, at which departments around the newsroom gathered to discuss the top stories they were working on or had just completed.
Throughout the day, Ms. Hirschfeld Davis would balance more meetings, overseeing the daily coverage, editing stories and scheduling shifts for the staff. Mikayla Bouchard, an assistant editor, would coordinate the coverage across all platforms. Justine Makieli, assistant day editor, and Margaret Ho, senior staff editor, would do most of the editing of the live report.
At night, Ms. Hirschfeld Davis and the team would plan out future articles. On some days, if there was a long enough break in the trial in the evening, she would move her work space to her kitchen at home.
Respites have been hard to come by for everyone. Ms. Cochrane said: “The trial has taken the rhythms of covering Capitol Hill and just kicked it up to hyperspeed for all of us: juggling quick updates, talking to sources, monitoring social media, staying in touch with the bureau, ducking into the [Senate] chamber and chasing after senators in the hallways.”
But she added a sentiment shared by many on the team. “Every day,” she said, “there’s the moment when you walk outside the Capitol and it’s all lit up, and it just hits you what a privilege it is to walk into that building and write about what happened inside.”