Even From Half a World Away, Pelosi Keeps a Tight Grip on Impeachment
WASHINGTON — Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s motorcade was winding through Jerusalem on Wednesday, en route to a state dinner hosted by the president of Israel, when she placed perhaps the most important call of her day — to Representative Adam B. Schiff, the man leading the charge to remove President Trump from office.
On the other end of the line, 5,900 miles away, Mr. Schiff, the top impeachment manager, was preparing to stride into the Senate chamber to begin arguing the House’s case, and the speaker wanted to compare notes before she slipped into a gathering of world leaders.
Ms. Pelosi’s role in the impeachment of Mr. Trump may be formally over, but by her own design, the matter is not out of her hands. Even in her absence from the Capitol this week, as the speaker traveled through Poland and Israel in remembrance of the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, she had her hand firmly on the tiller of the prosecution of the president.
In many ways, Ms. Pelosi is the eighth, largely unseen manager of the Democrats’ case.
She selected the group of seven House impeachment managers from among her closest and most loyal advisers, placing Mr. Schiff, the California Democrat and trusted protégé whom she privately calls “the general,” at its helm. Ms. Pelosi has dispatched her handpicked House general counsel to sit at the table inside the Senate chamber, with the prosecutors acting as her eyes and ears. She reviewed all the managers’ written briefs before they were filed. And the multipronged media campaign to make the case for Mr. Trump’s removal is being run out of her office, by her communications director and other staff.
“Look, she cares a lot about this,” Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the minority leader, said in a brief interview.
She is also hands-on by nature. Aides and lawmakers involved in the impeachment trial say that after unilaterally withholding the charges for nearly a month in a bid for leverage — a decision that Republicans fiercely criticized — Ms. Pelosi has now passed off many of the day-to-day tasks of the case. Yet even as the public focus has shifted to Mr. Schiff and his team of impeachment managers, who on Wednesday and Thursday began laying out their arguments for convicting Mr. Trump on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress, Ms. Pelosi has remained firmly in control.
Her approach underscores the stakes of the case for Democrats and for Ms. Pelosi herself, whose control of the House is in many ways on the line as much as the president’s fate is.
With the election less than 10 months away, Democrats are running a two-track prosecution: one aimed at persuading the Republican-controlled Senate to convict and remove Mr. Trump — an effort that is all but certain to fail — and another at voters who appear more skeptical and will have the final say at the ballot box.
A bungled trial could blow up in Democrats’ faces and cost them their House majority, squandering any chance at cutting short a presidency they view as deeply destructive to the country. A well-executed one could burnish their image and turn voters against Republicans who side with the president.
Republicans are happy to remind the public of the involvement of Ms. Pelosi, whom they have long vilified. Much of their defense of the president, both in the Senate and on television, rests on delegitimizing the House inquiry she blessed. They argue that Ms. Pelosi and Mr. Schiff have been driven by raw partisanship and a vendetta against the president, attempting nothing less than a coup.
“It’s not the Senate’s role to mop up the mess that the House made when Speaker Pelosi rammed this thing through,” Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the No. 2 House Republican, said on Fox News this week.
Ms. Pelosi’s approach to the Senate trial is no different from how she handled the impeachment process when it was on her side of the Capitol. After months of resisting a move she repeatedly said was too divisive, the speaker dove in headfirst after revelations about Mr. Trump’s pressure campaign on Ukraine, carefully stage-managing every public announcement and each major hearing to ensure that she maintained support among Democrats and from the public.
Backing off, her longtime aides and allies say, is not how Ms. Pelosi has retained the trust and control of her caucus for 17 years, longer than any other recent party leader.
“This is the approach which has been used and used successfully,” said John A. Lawrence, a former chief of staff to Ms. Pelosi.
But it could not stand in sharper contrast to how House Republican leaders handled President Bill Clinton’s impeachment in 1999, when they deliberately ignored the Senate’s trial.
Mr. Clinton’s impeachment coincided with the collapse of the party’s leadership team in the House after Republicans’ unexpected losses in the midterm congressional elections. Newt Gingrich of Georgia was forced to resign as speaker, and his would-be replacement, Robert L. Livingston of Louisiana, abruptly followed suit weeks later when, in the middle of the final debate over whether to impeach Mr. Clinton for sexual transgressions, he confessed in a speech on the House floor to his own extramarital affair.
By the time J. Dennis Hastert, a mild-mannered Republican, was chosen as speaker in early 1999, he was more interested in installing a new leadership team and policy agenda that could broaden the party’s appeal than seeing through an impeachment case that Republicans saw as politically toxic.
“He really wanted to run away from impeachment because he thought it was a loser politically, and he wanted to bring the country back together,” said John Feehery, who was a top aide to Mr. Hastert. “Clinton was not going to be kicked out of office, and our view was we had to restore the brand of the party from launching a partisan impeachment to get some stuff done.”
While her initial instincts might have been similar, once Ms. Pelosi embraced impeachment, she remained intimately involved.
As she has traveled this week, Ms. Pelosi has stayed up late in her hotel room, watching the impeachment trial on television as her lieutenants and Mr. Trump’s lawyers feuded over witnesses and trial rules. She is in frequent contact with Mr. Schumer, with whom she has orchestrated an effort to pressure Republicans into calling new witnesses and documents.
Ashley Etienne, Ms. Pelosi’s communications director and a veteran of the Obama administration, is working with a top aide to Mr. Schiff, Patrick Boland, to oversee an elaborate news media strategy around the impeachment effort. Before the trial formally got underway, Ms. Pelosi lent the managers and their staff her spacious Capitol office suite, where they spent the weekend holed away for marathon prep sessions with her aides.
Inside the chamber, Doug Letter, the House general counsel and a veteran Justice Department lawyer, is among only a handful of aides sharing the prosecution table.
In 1999, Mr. Hastert left it to Representative Henry Hyde, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee and a fellow Illinois Republican, to select a team of a dozen managers to help him prosecute the case.
Ms. Pelosi, by contrast, met with nearly every House manager in person, alone without staff, before she selected them, based not just on courtroom experience but their ability to connect with different segments of the country.
Aside from the occasional check-ins by staff for the speaker, Mr. Hyde and his team had free rein to conduct the trial as they saw fit, said Paul McNulty, who served as a top aide to Mr. Hyde.
“Everything we were doing then was being done strictly by the Judiciary Committee trying to work its way through,” Mr. McNulty said.
In that case, the managers met a less divided Senate, where many Democrats were deeply angry at their own party’s president and some Republicans were trying to help smooth over the bitterly partisan politics of the House. Mr. Clinton’s approval ratings were high, and he was not facing re-election.
The opposite is true this time, as members of both parties eye the election in November, when a deeply unpopular Mr. Trump is on the ballot. Lawmakers are keenly aware that the verdict in his Senate trial is unlikely to be the last word for Mr. Trump — or for them.
“Pelosi believes that impeachment is going to work for her politically, and we believed that impeachment was not,” Mr. Feehery said. “We ran away from it; she is running to embrace it. She hesitated at first, but she is all in.”