Iranians in Los Angeles Shed Few Tears for Suleimani. But What Comes Next?
LOS ANGELES — Growing up in Tehran, Roozbeh Farahanipour would listen attentively with his mother for the names of people executed by revolutionary forces. They were itemized reliably each day on the morning news.
It was 1979 and the Islamic Revolution in Iran had thrown the country into chaos. Roozbeh was 8 years old.
In time, he too became a target of the state’s repressive machine. He recalls being tortured while under interrogation, as an anti-government activist in his twenties, with a gruesome technique called the “chicken kebab.” In 1999, facing an execution order, he fled to Turkey and then to the United States, where he won political asylum and clambered to rebuild his life.
“I never thought I would leave my country. But when you feel your life is jeopardized, that’s when you make the critical decision,” he said.
Today, Mr. Farahanipour runs a Greek restaurant in west Los Angeles, in the heart of the Iranian-American enclave often known as Tehrangeles. The area, near the University of California, Los Angeles, looks at first glance like any other commercial district in the region — coffee shops, bustling foot traffic, swaying palm trees. But it is also a crucial haven for the hundreds of thousands of Southern Californians who make up the largest community of Iranians outside Iran, many of whom immigrated here amid intense unrest back home.
Persian signs and advertisements line the street, some of them written by hand.
Over the weekend, far away from the developments in the Middle East, painful memories echoed in the minds of many Iranian political asylees and their families even here in the peaceful Pacific, amid news that Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani of Iran had been killed in Baghdad by a coordinated American military strike. Those memories have informed a mixed reaction among Iranian-Americans, some of whom detested Mr. Suleimani but are wary of war.
On Thursday evening, the National Iranian American Council issued a blunt statement attacking the Trump administration’s strike: “The last thing the world needs is yet another disastrous American military adventure in the Middle East,” said Jamal Abdi, the organization’s president, calling the killing “a profoundly reckless move that will be viewed as an act of war in Tehran.”
But for Mr. Farahanipour, the matter is not so cut and dry.
Speaking Friday over coffee at his restaurant, Delphi Greek, he said it was difficult to parse whether it was wrong for the United States to kill Mr. Suleimani. And the possibility of armed military conflict, he said, is a frightening and painful one.
“But a world without Suleimani is a better world for everyone,” he said, adding that he tries to look at foreign policy in his new homeland through a bipartisan lens. He said he felt Mr. Suleimani was directly responsible for numerous acts of violence. “Personally, I’m happy he got assassinated.”
He offered praise for President Trump over his handling of an incident in June in which the Iranian government shot down an American drone over the Strait of Hormuz. The president said he was “cocked and loaded” for a retaliatory strike but called it off when he learned that 150 people would probably die in the attack.
“That is something I can’t hide my feelings on because I hate war. That was amazing,” he said. “The way I know President Trump, I never knew that’s how he would do it. But it was a brilliant handling of the situation.”
As a young man in Tehran in the late 1990s, Mr. Farahanipour built his life around radical ideas and subversive action. He gave speeches defending women’s rights, he said, and organized demonstrations against the ayatollahs’ government.
His punishment was common and brutal; regular detention, interrogations, and eventually torture.
“Roozbeh is dead, your new name is 607,” Mr. Farahanipour, now 48, recalls a guard telling him. It was the number of his jail cell.
In the years after he arrived in Los Angeles, he rented a small office in West Los Angeles where he could continue writing about repression back home. He slept there at night, he admitted, when he was unable to afford an apartment.
In 2009, firmly established in the city, he was eager to buy the restaurant beneath that small office when it came up for sale. Rather than change the menu to feature Persian food, he kept it Greek-inspired, as it had been for two decades already. He liked that the restaurant had endured as a stable presence in the neighborhood.
Farsheed Nooryani, 55, a real estate agent in the area, said that many Iranians living in the United States today vote Republican and tend to support conservative positions. And many, she added, may well support the administration’s recent assassination of the general.
But to her, General Suleimani’s death is connected to the same long history of American intervention in the Middle East that so many in Iran have come to resent and fear.
“To hell with Suleimani, I don’t care about him at all, and I don’t care about Trump either. But this will escalate the tensions in the region,” she said. “I’m angry at this administration, and even Obama’s administration for that matter. U.S. foreign policy, especially in the Middle East, has always been imperialistic.”
Ms. Nooryani was in her first year of high school in Tehran when the revolution began in 1978. That set into motion a series of escalating political purges that would ultimately result in her fleeing her home country. Following an arrest in 1984 while she and her husband were trying to leave the country, she spent five months as a prisoner.
“I belonged to a socialist group and also I was kind of a feminist,” she said to explain why she was the target of government aggression.
One of the most painful things for her about being home, she said, was being unable to finish her education because the government deemed her unfit “ethically, because I wasn’t a good practicing Muslim.” Her family, upper-middle-class and educated, had physicians and educators in its ranks. It was a devastating realization.
“Because I wasn’t able to continue that in Iran, and I was afraid of being called again to go to prison, I decided I had no choice but to leave,” she said. “I’m just one of so many and I’m one of the fortunate ones. Many of my comrades, they got longer sentences or they were executed.”
She ended up in Los Angeles after bouncing between Turkey, Bulgaria and Mexico. Her younger sister had settled in the region and was able to help with her immigration petition. But Iran and its people, she said, still pulls at her heart, for all her problems with the government. What happens there and in the Middle East deeply worries her.
“Sometimes I feel no matter how bad it gets, it’s still home,” she said.
Mr. Farahanipour expressed a similar abiding connection to the country of his youth, even if he disagrees with the politics surrounding the Suleimani assassination.
His life here is surely different, he said, and better. He is a business owner. He is the president of the West Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce.
He has stayed in touch with people back home and prides himself on sharing information about organizing politically. He finds great inspiration, he said, in a new generation of activists there. He and his wife, a pastry chef, have a young son they even named after a renowned mountain in Iran.
“As much as I love the Pacific, I think the Persian Gulf is in my D.N.A.,” he said.