Where Adults Who Need a Hand Gain Independence
Almost 50 years old, Cherry Simons had never had a place of her own. She lived with her mother in Panama until her mother died, and then moved to New York and stayed with family members.
When the situation in the home where she was staying deteriorated 10 years ago, Ms. Simons, now 60, turned to Rose Sauls, her case manager at Brooklyn Community Services.
Ms. Sauls found her a place to stay for the night, and then she made a proposal: What if Ms. Simons moved into a studio apartment?
“Rose said, ‘You can have your own place,’ and I said, ‘Really?’” Ms. Simons recalled recently as she sat in her apartment in Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood.
For more than a decade, she has lived in one of 12 apartments designated for adults with intellectual disabilities run by Brooklyn Community Services, a beneficiary agency of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Photographs of her niece and godson sit on a table. CDs are stacked next to a music player. A big red pot sits on the stove. Now and then, other residents stop by for a taste of her rice and chicken dishes, or the lemon cakes she bakes.
Ms. Simons enjoys going for walks, buying clothes and perfume at the mall, and traveling — particularly to warmer climates where she has family, like Florida and Texas. She recently cut and dyed her hair.
And during the week, Ms. Simons is working to get her GED. She dropped out of high school in Panama to care for her mother until she died in 1973. Now, she chats about life in Panama with a friend from a floor below, who also grew up there.
For Ms. Simons, having her own apartment gave her a new freedom, and her neighbors aren’t the only ones to benefit from the Individualized Residential Alternatives program, supported last year by $32,600 from The Fund.
Not only do the apartments give residents the ability to forge a life of their own, but they also ease the responsibilities of family members.
Shunelle Washington, another resident of the apartments, spent much of her life with her grandmother, Phyllis Jeffrey, as her main caretaker.
For many years, Ms. Jeffrey, now 82, was proud of being able to do clerical work for the New York Police Department and take care of Ms. Washington. She frequently took her granddaughter to the hospital during asthma attacks, sometimes two or three times a week.
But when she grew sick herself and had to have surgery on both of her knees, she realized how overextended she was. It is hard to no longer live with her granddaughter, Ms. Jeffrey said, but also better for both of them.
“It was a tough choice and I missed her a lot, but it was necessary,” Ms. Jeffrey said. “I couldn’t take care of her the way she was supposed to be taken care of.”
The two women talk on the phone almost every day, and Ms. Jeffrey brings Ms. Washington home for holidays and other events.
She is proud of her granddaughter’s success living alone, with help. Ms. Jeffrey said that when Ms. Washington was young, doctors told the family that she would not be able to live a satisfying life. As Ms. Jeffrey sat last month with Ms. Washington in her tidy apartment, filled with mementos and a colorful pink carpet, she said they had been proven wrong.
“When she was a year old, they said, ‘She will not be able to do nothing,’” Ms. Jeffrey said. “And she has come a long way. I am surprised sometimes.”
Ms. Washington spends several days each week handing food out to people at a senior living center in Manhattan with other people in her program. Sometimes she brings them newspapers. And she has developed friends among the older people who live at the center.
“They make me happy when I see them and talk to them,” Ms. Washington said. On weekends, she likes to go bowling, shop or listen to music.
Ms. Sauls, now a division director with Brooklyn Community Services, said that one of the most satisfying parts of the program was showing residents, and their family members, that they can accomplish more than they thought possible.
“We are always empowering them and building up their skills and giving them the tools that they need,” Ms. Sauls said.
Ms. Simons embodies that ideal. She moved into the apartments on Atlantic Avenue when they opened to adults with intellectual disabilities in 2009. Initially, she lived on a floor where she had 24/7 support from staff members, who helped her and others with medicine, food and other daily tasks.
But she did so well that staff members asked if she wanted to move to the seventh floor, where residents still have access to staff members but are able to live more independently.
“At first I was like, ‘Oh no,’” Ms. Simons said, laughing. But Ms. Sauls encouraged her because she knew she could handle it.
Now, Ms. Simons dances to music playing from her stereo in her apartment, as the smell of her freshly cooked meals wafts through the air.