Two Skiers Killed in Idaho Avalanche
Two skiers were killed, five were rescued and at least one more was unaccounted for after an avalanche Tuesday at a ski resort in northern Idaho, according to the Shoshone County Sheriff’s Office and the Silver Mountain Resort.
“Our deepest condolences go out to all the family and friends affected by this tragic event,” the sheriff’s office said in a statement early Wednesday.
The snow slide happened around 11 a.m. on Tuesday near Wardner Peak, a 6,200-foot mountain that is part of the Silver Mountain Resort in Kellogg, Idaho, the ski area said on its Facebook page.
Mac Pooler, the longtime mayor of Kellogg, said snowfall in the area had been below average this winter, but the resort had received 16 to 18 inches of new snow overnight.
“I’ve never heard of an avalanche up there that actually trapped anybody,” Mr. Pooler said in a phone interview Tuesday.
It was not immediately clear if the skiers were rescued from a patrolled area of the slopes or if they had gone off course, which Mr. Pooler said happened from time to time.
“You deal with a certain amount of people that signs don’t mean anything to,” he said.
Hours after announcing that all skiers had been accounted for, the resort said it had received word on Wednesday that one person remained missing.
The resort said in a statement that it had received a call around 7:30 a.m. on Wednesday from a concerned family member about a skier they were unable to contact. “This person has been confirmed to be skiing yesterday at Silver during the time of the avalanche,” the resort statement said. “An intense search is currently underway with Silver Mountain Ski Patrol as well as multiple teams and dog units from various agencies.”
The sheriff’s office referred questions about the missing person to the Silver Mountain Resort, but said in a statement that around 30 search and rescue responders, from multiple agencies, were searching the avalanche site on Wednesday.
The resort, which Mr. Pooler said was popular with skiers from the Spokane, Wash., area; Coeur d’Alene, Idaho; Montana; and Canada, declined to answer additional questions, instead referring a reporter to its Facebook page.
The authorities did not immediately release the names of the people who died. The United States Forest Service had issued a backcountry avalanche warning earlier Tuesday for the Idaho Panhandle National Forests.
There have been 256 avalanche fatalities in the U.S. in the last 10 ski seasons, according to the National Ski Areas Association, a trade organization for ski area owners and operators.
The majority of avalanches occur in the backcountry, which is described as terrain outside of the ski area’s operating boundary, the association said, and noted only seven of those reported avalanche deaths occurred within a ski area’s boundary.
Tuesday’s deaths bring the total of avalanche fatalities in the U.S. to six since the season started last fall, according to data collected by the Colorado Avalanche Information Center. Before Tuesday’s avalanche, another avalanche on Jan. 1 caused two deaths.