Trump Denies Telling Bolton That Ukraine’s Aid Depended on Biden Investigations
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday pushed back on a firsthand account from his former national security adviser, John R. Bolton, about tying military aid for a foreign ally to his own personal agenda, as senators consider the president’s future in the Oval Office.
“I NEVER told John Bolton that the aid to Ukraine was tied to investigations into Democrats, including the Bidens,” Mr. Trump wrote just after midnight, referring to a widely debunked theory that the president had pursued about former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and his son Hunter.
In an unpublished manuscript of his upcoming book, Mr. Bolton described the White House decision to withhold military aid from Ukraine until he left the White House in September. As national security adviser, Mr. Bolton would have been involved in many of the high-level discussions about Ukraine.
Mr. Bolton’s account directly undercuts one of Mr. Trump’s defense arguments, that the frozen funding was not connected to his petitioning of Ukraine’s leader, President Volodymyr Zelensky, to help him in the 2020 presidential election by announcing an anticorruption investigation into the Bidens.
The new details come at a time when senators approach making a final decision — possibly by the end of the week — on whether to allow new evidence and new witnesses, like Mr. Bolton, to be introduced in Mr. Trump’s trial in the Senate. Mr. Trump’s defense team started presenting his defense on Saturday and has through Tuesday to argue against his removal from office.
“There can be no doubt now that Mr. Bolton directly contradicts the heart of the president’s defense,” Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senator Chuck Schumer, the minority leader, said in a joint statement on Sunday after The New York Times’s article about Mr. Bolton’s account was published.
Hours after his midnight posts, Mr. Trump falsely stated that the Democrats never asked Mr. Bolton to testify during the House impeachment inquiry last year. Republicans and Mr. Trump’s defense team have argued that to call witnesses at this stage in the impeachment proceedings amounts to Democrats telling the Senate to do the work the House did not.
Mr. Trump also falsely claimed that his White House released the critical military aid to Ukraine ahead of schedule.
Democrats have been pushing the Republican-led Senate to allow new witnesses, including possibly Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, who played a key role in the Ukraine pressure campaign. There were few signs by the end of last week that any Republicans would vote with Democrats on the matter.
But Mr. Bolton’s account about Mr. Trump’s motivations for freezing the military aid appeared to further sway at least two Republican senators — Mitt Romney of Utah and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska — to consider hearing new testimony.
“I think it’s increasingly likely that other Republicans will join those of us who think we should hear from John Bolton,” Mr. Romney told reporters on Monday.
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and one of the president’s biggest supporters in the Senate, said if Democrats call witnesses, Republicans should be able to as well. Republicans have been clamoring to hear from Mr. Biden and his son about their ties to Ukraine, which Mr. Trump has called corrupt.
By Monday morning, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, and Mr. Graham had pressed the White House for an explanation of Mr. Bolton’s account.
Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Bolton's manuscript was provided to the National Security Council and edits to it had not been seen or made by anyone else in the White House.
“That is something that we have kept walled off for obvious reasons,” Ms. Grisham said Monday on Fox News. “Just could be a conflict with the trail going on, so it’s nothing that I’ve seen and nothing that I know about in terms of what they would remove for national security.”
Fred Fleitz, Mr. Bolton’s former chief of staff, called on him in an opinion piece for Fox News to immediately withdraw the book from the publisher.
Mr. Bolton’s lawyer blamed the White House for the disclosure of the book’s contents, which Mr. Bolton submitted for a standard security review 12 days after the House impeached Mr. Trump. It is possible that the submission of Mr. Bolton’s book to the White House deepened desires to keep Mr. Bolton from testifying.
In his manuscript, Mr. Bolton describes an effort that he had made, along with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, to push Mr. Trump to release the aid. Mr. Bolton said he also spoke with Attorney General William P. Barr about his concerns over the parallel diplomacy with Ukraine led by the president’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani. Mr. Barr, whom Mr. Trump mentioned in his July phone call with Mr. Zelensky, has tried to distance himself from Mr. Giuliani and the Ukraine matter.
Bob Driscoll, a lawyer for Mr. Mulvaney, disputed Mr. Bolton’s account and said Mr. Bolton was merely trying to sell his book, which is set to be released in mid-March.
Mr. Bolton, who has said he would testify at the Senate trial if he was subpoenaed, wrote in the manuscript that Mr. Pompeo told him privately that there was no basis to criticize the American ambassador to Ukraine at the time, Marie L. Yovanovitch. Career diplomats have testified that there was no justification to fire Ms. Yovanovitch. Mr. Giuliani and two of his associates had been pushing Mr. Trump to fire her since the spring of 2018.