What’s Going On in This Graph? | North American Bird Populations
These graphs and map, which show the change in the past 48 years in the bird population by habitat for the United States and Canada, appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
After looking closely at the graphs and map above (or at this full-size image), think about these three questions:
The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order. Start with “I notice,” then “I wonder,” and end with a catchy headline.
2. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment online. Teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students say.)
3. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
On Wednesday, Jan. 15, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, Jan. 17, we will reveal more information about the graphs at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graphs differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
The reasons for a major decline in the bird population were laid out in 1962 by Rachel Carson in her book “Silent Spring.” Pesticides were decimating our bird population. The bird population has rebounded several times over the past century with the enactment of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act in 1916 (with subsequent revisions), the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency in 1970, the banning of the pesticide DDT in 1972, and changes in farming practices and real estate development.
Now, a team of researchers and ornithologists have data that shows, as reported in the New York Times article “An Ecological ‘Crisis’ as 2.9 Billion Birds Vanish,” that the number of birds in the continental United States and Canada has fallen by 29 percent in the past 48 years. That’s almost 3 million fewer birds than there were in 1970. More than 90 percent of the total loss can be attributed to 12 bird families, including sparrows, warblers, blackbirds and finches. The National Audubon Society projects that at least eight states could see their state birds largely or entirely disappear from within their borders. Is this the precursor of future extinction of some species? Birds not only give us great pleasure, but they are vital to the health of our ecosystems, pest control and pollination.
The study from universities, government agencies and nonprofit organizations coupled datasets from 1970 to 2018 for 529 species living in 10 breeding habitats from surveys, amateur bird-watchers’ sightings, and weather radar network reports on migrating birds. The causes of this crisis-level decline include the loss of habitat to development and farming, chemicals and building design. (Last month, New York City passed legislation requiring “bird-friendly” glass on all new construction to reduce the thousands of bird deaths caused by birds mistakenly flying into the city’s buildings.)
Maybe this article will make you more mindful of birds and the potential extinction of some species. Remember that the most numerous bird on the planet, the passenger pigeon, went extinct at the end of the 19th century in about 20 years. What can be done in your community to stem the decline and possible extinction of birds?
Here are some of the headlines that really capture the meaning of these graphs: “The Early Bird Catches the Worm, But Who Will Catch Them Now?” by Brett and Casey of Ithaca High School in New York, “Birds Fly Away, But Do Not Seem to be Coming Back” by Ana Cristina of Punta Cana in Dominican Republic, and “Bye Bye Birdies” by Lauren of Academy of Saint Elizabeth in Morristown, New Jersey.
You may want to think critically about these questions.
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graphs.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going on in This Graph?” which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data.
Keep noticing and wondering. We continue to welcome your responses.
Join us Wednesday, Jan. 22 to notice and wonder about “water stress” affecting the population worldwide. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern Time during the live online moderation.
To see all previously published Stat Nuggets with links to their graphs, go to this index.
BAR GRAPH
A bar graph displays the distribution of a categorical variable by showing the number of values (frequency bar graph) or percentage of values (relative frequency bar graph) that fall in specific categories.
In the relative frequency bar graph at the top, the percentage loss in bird population by habitat since 1970 is shown.
TIME SERIES GRAPH
A time series graph shows the change in a numerical variable over time.
In the time series graph, the variable is the number of fewer birds as compared to 1970 (net loss) by U.S. and Canada habitat for the years 1970 to 2018.
ABSOLUTE CHANGE and PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM A BASELINE
Absolute change and percentage change from a baseline or initial value are calculated when we are interested in comparing values over time. Whereas absolute change is merely the difference between a baseline and a later (or earlier) value, the percentage change is this difference divided by the baseline value. This calculation is multiplied by 100 to obtain a percentage. An absolute change and a percentage change are positive if the values are increasing over time, negative if they are decreasing, and zero if there is no change.
The time series graph at the bottom shows the absolute change in the bird population by habitat. All of the habitats except wetlands have experienced a decline in population as shown by downward (negative) sloping lines.
The bar graph at the top shows the percentage change in the bird population from the 1970 baseline. Here, too, the graph shows that all habitats other than wetlands have had a negative percentage change in the bird population.
_________
The graphs for “What’s Going on in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Erica Chauvet, a mathematics professor at Waynesburg University in Pennsylvania, and moderates online with George Carr, a math teacher at St. Joseph’s High School and Clemson University in Greenville, South Carolina.