Day 5 of Trump’s Trial: The Defense Opens
After three days of eight-hour presentations by the House managers prosecuting the Senate impeachment trial of President Trump, the defense team took the stage Saturday morning. The president’s lawyers immediately made clear that they would not be following in the prosecution’s slow, methodical, somewhat repetitive footsteps. Speaking for a scant two hours, they vowed to keep things short and sweet.
“We don’t anticipate using that much time,” said Pat Cipollone, the White House counsel, in his opening remarks. “We don’t believe that they have come anywhere close to meeting their burden for what they’re asking you to do.”
And what does the president’s team contend that the House managers are asking the Senate to do?
“They’re asking you not only to overturn the results of the last election, but as I’ve said before, they’re asking you to remove President Trump from the ballot in an election that’s occurring in approximately nine months,” Mr. Cipollone said. “They’re asking you to tear up all of the ballots across this country on your own initiative, take that decision away from the American people.”
The Democrats pursuing the case against Mr. Trump say they are worried about the integrity of the electoral process, Mr. Cipollone said. But don’t believe them, he warned. “They are here to perpetrate the most massive interference of an election in American history. You can’t allow that to happen.”
(Technically speaking, barring the president from running for office again could require a separate vote from removal, but why quibble about minutiae at this stage?)
And so the core message of the defense team has been set: A vote to convict is not merely a vote against the President. It is a vote against the American people and the very foundations of this democracy.
Going into the day, there had been an air of mystery surrounding the proceedings. Unlike the prosecution, much of whose case had been previewed during the House’s hearings, this was the debut of the president’s defense. What would his legal eagles argue? What would their central narrative be? How many distractions, distortions and dodgy allegations could they fit into just a couple of hours? (Spoiler alert: plenty.)
The defense did not open with much razzle dazzle. Its legal celebrities, Alan Dershowitz and Ken Starr, did not speak. It fell mostly to lawyers from the White House Counsel’s Office to, in a very staid and lawyerly fashion, lay out the disingenuous claims that impeachment watchers have heard so many times before, including: that the House proceedings were inappropriately “secretive” and unprecedented in denying the president due process; that the transcript of the July 25 call between Mr. Trump and Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky proves that there was no quid pro quo; that Representative Adam Schiff, now the lead House manager, was trying to fool the American public into believing that his dramatized interpretation of that call was a literal read out; and that the whistle-blower complaint at the heart of this investigation, the substance of which has been overwhelmingly confirmed, is invalid because the whistle-blower’s identity remain a mystery.
Nope, nope, nope and nope.
The key elements of the president’s defense came into focus. His lawyers maintain that “the president did nothing wrong,” as more than one of his team stated. All of his actions, they say, were in the service of the national interest and in keeping with broader concerns about corruption and the need for other nations to shoulder a larger share of the burden for maintaining global order.
The president’s team will continue to complain loudly about process. Obstruction? Hah. It would have been irresponsible — dangerous, even — for Mr. Trump to cooperate with such a shambolic and unfair investigation, they said.
And, of course, they have embraced Mr. Trump’s narrative of victimhood. “Let’s for a moment put ourselves in the shoes of the president of the United States right now,” urged Jay Sekulow, the president’s personal lawyer, as he launched a meandering discourse on FISA court applications, operation Crossfire Hurricane and the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller into Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election. His implication was that Mr. Trump has been the sinless target of a Deep State plot to destroy him.
The defense presentation had its merits. It was fast-paced, which many viewers will appreciate — including many in the Senate. The president’s lawyers stressed the secondhand nature of much of the prosecution’s evidence. They also pointed to public statements from Mr. Zelensky that he never felt pressure from Mr. Trump to pursue investigations in exchange for American military or diplomatic assistance. The House managers, the defense claims, have nothing but conjecture and hearsay.
To which the obvious response is: Then the Senate should vote to pursue additional documents and testimony to help clarify the case. Which is, in fact, the argument that multiple Democrats were making after the session.
The Republican leadership is unlikely to be moved.