Explaining Why a Topic Matters: The Times Personal Health Column
Our new Mentor Text series spotlights writing from The Times that students can learn from and emulate.
This entry aims to help support those participating in our STEM-writing contest, in which students are invited to choose an issue or question in science, technology, engineering, math or health that interests them, then write a 500-word explanation that will engage and enlighten readers.
For even more on how to help your students write interesting, clear and meaningful informational pieces, please see our related writing unit.
Our STEM-writing contest asks students to include three elements — an engaging opening; quotes from experts or research; and a section that explains why the topic they’ve chosen matters.
To help students think about that last element, we pose these questions: Why do you care — and why should we care? Whom or what does your topic affect? How is it relevant to broader questions in the field, to the world today and to our own lives?
Most informational journalism explicitly addresses those questions. A recent piece about the coronavirus, for instance, begins with a story about a sick Chinese man who hasn’t been able to get even basic care at a local hospital. Then the story pulls back and gives us this context:
But even in articles about less serious topics, you’ll still find such a section. Let’s say, for instance, you’re a journalist writing about what it’s like to be friends with a social-media influencer. At some point you will have to explain the significance of the topic and why it is worth your readers’ time. To see what we mean, take a look at “Will You Be My #Content?,” a 2020 Style article about social media influencers and oversharers, and the friends who don’t necessarily want to be co-stars.
As you read, try to put your finger on the paragraph or paragraphs in which the writer explains to you why this topic matters now, and what questions it raises about our world.
When you’re finished, if you’re doing this in a classroom setting, you might share the paragraph or paragraphs you chose with others. Here is the paragraph we chose, which comes right after the opening story about Ellen Wright and her friends:
This is what journalists call the “nut graf,” shorthand for “nutshell paragraph,” because it explains the context of a topic and gives you, more or less, the essence of the story. It often follows the “lead,” or opening paragraph or paragraphs that attempt to get your attention.  Poynter, a global journalism institute, explains it as when the writer “backs up to provide context for the scene in the lead, like a filmmaker drawing back from a close-up to a wide-angle shot,” writing:
In this edition of our Mentor Text series, you’ll both learn more about how these paragraphs work and try to write your own.
Are you hooked on your smartphone? How much time do you spend looking at it every day? What would it be like if you had to go a full day without it?
You’re about to read a piece full of tips and ideas on this subject. Before you do, try to write a “nut” paragraph about why the topic of being “hooked on our smartphone” matters in our world today. Why is it a problem now? What effects is it having on us personally, and on our society at large? Why should we learn about how to deal with this issue?
Now that you’ve written your own “nut graf” on the topic, take a look at “Hooked On Our Smartphones” and see if you can locate the place where Jane Brody, the author, moves “from a close-up to a wide-angle shot” and does what we just asked you to do.
She begins the piece by quoting Lin-Manuel Miranda and describing a number of common scenarios in which looking at a smartphone hijacks our attention.
But with the paragraph that begins, “Observations like these have prompted a New York psychotherapist to ask, ‘What really matters?’ in life,” the author begins to give us a broader context for these observations. Then she writes:
If you notice, that paragraph is really just one long sentence that quickly lists the surprisingly broad range of ways that digital technology is having negative effects on us.
Ms. Brody has written The Times’s Personal Health column since 1976, so you have many useful examples to choose from if you scroll through it. Pick a few that are especially interesting to you, then read them to see if you can find a paragraph or paragraphs that perform this “in a nutshell” function.
For instance you might read:
“How to ‘Winterize’ Your Dog”
“Looking on the Bright Side May Be Good for Your Health”
“For Real Weight Control, Try Portion Control”
“Managing Teenage Acne”
“The Crisis in Youth Suicide”
And if you did, you might identify paragraphs like the ones below as good examples of places where the author zooms out and shows you why the topic matters.
From “How to ‘Winterize’ Your Dog,” a paragraph that is not about practical ways to do this, but about why you should do it in the first place:
From “Looking on the Bright Side May Be Good for Your Health,” a section that explains why this information might literally help extend your life:
From “For Real Weight Control, Try Portion Control,” a brief explanation for why this way of eating is better than the many, many diet fads the reader is probably already familiar with:
From “Is Your Sleep Cycle Out of Sync? It May Be Genetic,” a paragraph that follows a story about an early-riser friend, but segues into research that shows many others also suffer from this problem:
From “Managing Teenage Acne,” a paragraph that puts the problem in context — being a teenager is hard, and having acne makes it even harder:
From “The Crisis in Youth Suicide,” statistics that show that this is a crisis we should care about:
Step back from whatever topic you’re writing about and focus on why it is important. Try answering these questions first so that when you get to the point in your piece where you might include a kind of “nut” paragraph of your own, you’re prepared with ideas:
Finally, take a look at this edition of our “Annotated by the Author” series, in which the Times international climate reporter, Somini Sengupta, shows you where, why and how she included “why-it-matters” paragraphs in her piece “These Five Cuisines are Easier on the Planet.” What can you learn from her choices?
