With Impeachment in the News, Ads Are Staying Away From Politics
At this point in the 2016 election cycle Donald J. Trump was slashing through a field of more seasoned candidates and Hillary Clinton appeared to have a good shot at becoming the first female president. Americans were transfixed, and a number of advertising campaigns capitalized on the growing interest in an unusual race.
A Chrysler commercial starred a pair of actors known for their portrayals of fictional White House occupants: Martin Sheen (President Jed Bartlet of “The West Wing”) and Bill Pullman (President Thomas Whitmore of “Independence Day”).
An ad for Legal Sea Foods, a restaurant chain based in Boston, presented the company’s chief executive, Roger Berkowitz, in a mock campaign poster with a slogan that referenced a Trump campaign promise: “If we build a wall on the border, who will eat our delicious fish tacos?”
Four years later, things have changed. The environment for advertising is “more scary than exciting,” said Ellis Verdi, the president of DeVito/Verdi, the agency that created the Legal Sea Foods ad, and most companies no longer see an upside in weighing in on politics, even jokingly.
“There’s fear, as opposed to the entertainment that was associated with the horse race a couple of years ago,” Mr. Verdi said. “Even free expression is a challenge right now. People are holding their hands over their eyes and ears a little bit. This is not the moment for advertisers to take risks.”
With impeachment in the news and the 2020 campaign inspiring nasty hashtags on social media, it has become routine for companies to reject pitches for ads that even touch on politics. They have also asked that their ads be placed far from candidates’ campaign spots.
“It’s like McCarthyism — people are too frickin’ scared to say anything,” said Gaston Legorburu, a longtime advertising executive who founded the agency Glue IQ. “I’ve seen briefs where on Page 1 they’re telling you to, by all means, stay away from anything that is political.”
In the digital sphere, companies are taking steps to make sure that their ads do not appear next to content that includes keywords like “Russia,” “Ukraine” and “election,” according to data compiled by the technology company Integral Ad Science.
“Impeachment” is another no-no. In December 2018, few companies blocked that word. A year later, nearly 50 companies had done so.
Some brand executives have told ad agencies that they are afraid of alienating customers or drawing the wrath of the presidential Twitter account.
“It’s a divided world that we live in,” said Raja Rajamannar, the chief marketing officer at Mastercard. “Can you afford to exclude half of your audience?”
Other companies are avoiding politically engaged ads out of simple fatigue.
“Trump has been in America’s 24-hour news cycle for the past four years: countless hours of ‘Saturday Night Live’ skits, tweets, memes, #resistance microsites, etc.,” Zachary Roif, an associate creative director at the marketing agency R/GA, said in an email. “People have simply had enough — enough outrage, enough disdain, enough shock value to the point where making a statement feels a little tired.”
And then there is the risk of offending Mr. Trump and how that could affect business.
“This notion that you pick on a president and then he tweets about you and is mean to your company is a new thing,” said Eamonn Store, the chief executive of the consulting firm FairShare and a former North American chief executive of Guardian News & Media. “If you happen to be a large technology brand like Microsoft, and the government is your biggest client, then the last thing you need is to be in conflict with the White House.”
Many companies, Mr. Store added, believe Mr. Trump will win re-election. If that happens, he said, “being the pro-impeachment enterprise is not going to be good for business.”
The president has railed against Amazon, Google and Harley-Davidson. When Nike announced in 2018 that it had entered into a new marketing deal with the former N.F.L. quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who had angered the administration by kneeling during the national anthem to protest police brutality and racism, Mr. Trump said on Twitter, “Nike is getting absolutely killed with anger and boycotts.”
Things are different on the other side of the Atlantic. Before the fractious general election in Britain last month, Burger King put up an ad on the sides of a double-decker bus featuring a photo of a burger and the tagline “Another Whopper on the side of a bus. Must be an election.” The British supermarket chain Tesco commented cheekily on the political discord with an advertisement showing bottles of liquor crowded around the words “Time for a cabinet reshuffle.”
This is the kind of advertising — politically engaged, cheerfully flippant — that is not making the rounds in the United States.
In recent years companies have been willing to associate themselves with broad messages on social issues, using ads to support female empowerment, the environment and other causes that do not raise many hackles. But the specifics of 2020 seem too hot to touch.
“It just feels wrong right now,” Mr. Verdi said.