60 Seconds With Jeff Chen
Seattle, Wash.
The Los Angeles Times, 2010
July 5, 2010
I started solving crosswords about 10 years ago, shortly before meeting Jill Denny, now my (much) better half. She’s a much stronger solver, so we would do the Sunday New York Times Crossword in parallel, Jill finishing in about 30 minutes and then patiently waiting as I uttered the mumblings of a moron for three to infinity-plus-one hours more.
When I realized that real people were making these amazing creative works of art, I figured, if these idiots can make one, why not me? Turns out (to no one’s surprise) that I’m the idiot! Twenty-two New York Times rejections later, all giving me kind and useful feedback, Jill and I made one together. It was accepted. As it turns out, I’m not just being humble when I talk up my wife — numbers don’t lie.
What else would I be doing? What? Something useful, you say? Huh.
I use Crossword Compiler. Any program is fine, but the key factor is a strong word list (most programs come with default word lists that are utter poo). A good software program and word list will only get you so far, though. At the end of the day, you still have to do all the composing yourself.
About five hours.
I prioritize long fill that hits my Holy Trinity:
1.) Fresh
2.) Recognizable
3.) Can take a clever clue.
Scanning through the A’s of my Personal Word List, I like ABSENTEE BALLOT better than AARON BURR SIR or ACL REPAIR, for example. None of them have been in The New York Times, so they’re all fresh and colorful, but AARON BURR SIR might just be three random words to someone who is not a fan of the play “Hamilton.” ABSENTEE BALLOT has all sorts of potential for a clever clue — think “Punched out” or “Check all the boxes” — while ACL REPAIR would have to be explicitly explained, taking away some of the fun.
I’m a writer focusing on middle grade novels. My first book, “Ultraball: Lunar Blitz,” came out in January 2019 (HarperCollins). The sequel, “Ultraball: Deathstrike,” was released recently. It would be great if you bought a copy. Or 50.