On Politics: Still Talking About Iowa
Pat Provencher waited for a Pete Buttigieg campaign event to begin at Laconia Middle School in New Hampshire on Tuesday.
A speech that began over raucous chants of “four more years” ended with an opponent tearing up her copy of the remarks.
Officially, it was the State of the Union address, but it sometimes felt more like a political battle royale.
Trump’s third State of the Union address was his most combative — and also his most triumphant-seeming. Expecting acquittal on Wednesday in his impeachment trial, speaking on the day that his Gallup approval rating hit the highest number of his presidency (49 percent), Trump spent much of the speech boasting about the thriving economy he said he had fostered.
He devoted an entire section of the speech to ticking off the various demographics currently enjoying historically low unemployment rates.
In what seemed like a preview of his general-election talking points, Trump highlighted his trade policies, tax cuts and deregulation — while taking pains to depict Democratic politicians as out-and-out “socialists.”
Speaker Nancy Pelosi looked on in disgust throughout, hardly ever rising to applaud, and as the speech ended, she made a point of tearing up the papers she had been reading in front of the cameras.
In a first, Trump staged two made-for-TV moments during the speech. He announced from the podium that Rush Limbaugh, the conservative commentator who recently announced he had Stage 4 lung cancer, would receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom, as some Democrats groaned. Melania Trump presented him with the medal.
The president’s impeachment trial is still technically underway — but the result appears to be basically guaranteed.
Republican senators are expected to easily vote to acquit Trump on Wednesday, delivering a finishing blow to Democrats’ efforts to remove him from office.
Democrats worried when they opened the impeachment trial that failing to bring about a conviction would leave Trump unshackled and invigorated going into the 2020 campaign.
It’s too early to know whether that will turn out to be the case — but he was certainly acting that way at the State of the Union. And the upswing in his approval rating during the trial will probably leave some Democrats unsettled.
Fifty-two percent of Americans in the Gallup poll said they thought Trump should be acquitted, versus 46 percent who wanted him convicted and removed from office.