What It’s Like to Be the Face of Trump’s Super Bowl Ad
WASHINGTON — Alice Marie Johnson was watching the Super Bowl with two of her sisters on Sunday night when she saw her own face in an advertisement amid the commercials for Doritos and Audis.
Ms. Johnson was serving a life sentence in an Alabama prison for a nonviolent drug conviction when the president commuted her sentence in 2018. The reality television star Kim Kardashian West had discovered Ms. Johnson’s story on social media and personally appealed to him on her behalf.
And now the 64-year-old African-American woman was the star of the Trump campaign’s multimillion-dollar Super Bowl ad, part of an effort by Mr. Trump and his son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, to reach black voters. Footage of Ms. Johnson reuniting with her family after nearly 22 years in prison was viewed by 102 million football and Jennifer Lopez fans watching the game.
For Ms. Johnson, who cannot vote in the election because of her criminal conviction, it all came as a bit of a surprise.
“I knew it was a strong possibility that I was going to be in the ad,” Ms. Johnson said in an interview on Thursday afternoon. “At least a week before, I’d been told there was a possibility. I didn’t know I would be the full ad. I thought I might be somewhere in the ad.”
The ad featuring Ms. Johnson was made by the Trump campaign late last year. But the president settled on using the 30-second spot during the Super Bowl only in the days leading up to the game, people familiar with the process said.
Ms. Johnson described the experience of seeing it for the first time, in real time, from her hotel room in Miami as “thrilling,” and the reaction, after the fact, as out-of-body. “I was going through the airport and I could see people trying to figure out, ‘Is that that lady?’ I had someone in the seat next to me say, ‘Are you that lady who Kim Kardashian helped come home?’”
Since her release, Ms. Johnson has worked as a criminal justice reform activist, and published a memoir, “After Life: My Journey From Incarceration to Freedom.” It was a coincidence that she happened to also be in Miami, this year’s Super Bowl host city, on Sunday night, where she was attending an event for the Stand Together Foundation, which helps people living in poverty find jobs.
Mr. Trump, over the past few days, has proved himself to be a master of elevating a heartwarming story that affects just one person as evidence of the larger good his administration is doing for working people’s lives. At his State of the Union address on Tuesday night, he surprised Stephanie Davis, a single mother, with a scholarship that would allow her fourth-grade daughter to attend the school of her choice.
Ms. Johnson said she was aware of some backlash to the Super Bowl advertisement, with critics calling it a political play aimed at papering over Mr. Trump’s record on race. But she said highlighting her personal story was good for her movement, even if some saw it as a cynical maneuver. “Some people say, ‘Oh, this poor lady is being used,’” she said. “I don’t feel like a prop. To have criminal justice reform as the centerpiece of the Super Bowl ad, that lifts everyone up in this arena.”
Ms. Johnson said she was not a political person and did not have any plans to campaign for Mr. Trump. But she said she was proud to be the face of his campaign on television.
“I’ve been such a source of pride for him,” she said. “Who doesn’t want to show something they’re proud of during an election year? That’s what all the candidates do. For him to highlight me, it makes me know he’s not only proud, he’s super proud.”
She described herself as “not an expert in politics” but someone fighting for “anything that advances my cause, anything that advances my cause of bringing people home.”
Ms. Johnson would not say whether she would vote for Mr. Trump if she could. “I can’t vote, and that’s part of what I’m fighting for,” she said. But as for criticizing Mr. Trump, she said that was simply out of the question for her.
“Can you imagine turning on someone who saves your life?” she said. “Just on a personal level, can you imagine?”