Brazil’s Top Court Strikes Down Ban on Netflix Film Portraying Jesus as Gay
RIO DE JANEIRO — The Supreme Court on Thursday allowed Netflix to continue showing a short film depicting Jesus as a gay man, reversing a lower court’s ruling that the film be taken down because it did “irreparable damage” to the nation’s Christians.
The film, a satire called The First Temptation of Christ, ignited controversy among conservative politicians and clergy when it was released in December. The uproar escalated when, on Christmas Eve, the production company responsible for the film was the target of a firebomb attack.
This week’s rulings are yet another flash point in the country’s culture wars, which have grown increasingly bitter since the election of far-right President Jair Bolsonaro in 2018.
In striking down the lower court’s ban, the president of Brazil’s Supreme Court ruled Thursday that freedom of expression was a fundamental right in a democracy.
“A piece of satire is not going to undermine the values of Christian faith, which has been around for more than 2,000 years,” the court’s president, Justice José Antonio Dias Toffoli, wrote.
Netflix had appealed the lower court ruling, saying that it would fight for artistic expression, “which goes to the heart of great storytelling.”
On Tuesday, a judge in Rio de Janeiro had banned the film in response to a lawsuit filed by Centro Dom Bosco, a Brazilian Christian organization, which has denounced the film as blasphemous.
The judge, Benedicto Abicair, concluded that keeping the film online was “more likely to cause grave and irreparable damage” than removing it from the public domain. He said the ruling would benefit Brazil’s “majority Christian” society.
Brazil, home to more Catholics than any other country in the world, also has a fast-growing conservative evangelical population that has gained more political clout in recent years. Many had celebrated the lower court’s ban.
Damares Alves, an evangelical pastor who serves as minister for Human Rights, Families and Women, lauded the lower court for a “beautiful and timely decision!”
But David Miranda, an openly gay federal lawmaker, called the decision an “attack on democracy” in the Bolsonaro era. “We can’t forget that this attack is rooted in homophobia,” he said in a text message. “We’ll resist.”
On Christmas Eve, masked assailants lobbed Molotov cocktails at Porta dos Fundos, the company that produced the film. No one was injured, and the firebombs did little damage. But a video posted online took credit for the attack and made clear that it was an effort to silence the filmmakers.
Law enforcement officials have identified one of the men suspected of being involved in the  firebombing.
The suspect, Eduardo Fauzi, a 41-year-old resident of Rio de Janeiro, flew to Moscow shortly after the attack. In an interview with Época magazine, Mr. Fauzi said that while the attack was certainly a crime, he felt it was “perfectly moral” since the justice system did not stand in the way of the film’s dissemination, which he called a “monstrous crime.”