Kobe Bryant Split Washington Post Newsroom During 2018 Visit
The suspension of a Washington Post reporter who referred to a 2003 sexual assault charge against Kobe Bryant on Twitter in the hours after his death led to an uproar among the newspaper’s staff members.
It wasn’t the first time the N.B.A. star had been at the center of a debate at The Post.
On Monday, more than 300 newsroom employees signed a letter sharply critical of top editors who had placed the reporter, Felicia Sonmez, on administrative leave while they reviewed her social media activity. In an article that same day, Erik Wemple, a media columnist for The Post, called the suspension “misguided.” On Tuesday, the newspaper announced that Ms. Sonmez had not violated The Post’s social media guidelines and allowed her to go back to work.
The tension in the newsroom was partly about how the paper’s journalists use social media. But it also concerned differing opinions of Mr. Bryant, who died in a helicopter crash Sunday along with eight others, including his daughter Gianna. Was the reputation of the man who led the Los Angeles Lakers to five championships irreparably tarnished by the 2003 allegations?
This week, journalists at The Post recalled an earlier time when a disagreement concerning Mr. Bryant had divided the newsroom. It happened in October 2018, when Mr. Bryant was given a welcome worthy of a V.I.P. at the paper’s Franklin Square headquarters in downtown Washington.
He posed for photos with staff members. There were smiles and handshakes. Martin Baron, The Post’s executive editor since 2013, chatted with him in the newsroom as a staff photographer captured the moment. Mr. Bryant was also granted an audience with the paper’s White House reporters, who met with him in a conference room on the seventh floor. Journalists caught glimpses of the talk through the room’s glass walls.
Mr. Bryant, who retired from basketball in 2016, also met with a sports reporter who had been working for months on a profile focused on his forays into new media ventures. He also sat for portrait photographs that illustrated the article when it was published the next month.
Before the story was assigned, Mr. Bryant called Mr. Baron and described his post-basketball career ambitions, according to a person with knowledge of the call. Mr. Baron later shared what they had discussed with a sports editor, the person said.
Shortly after Mr. Bryant’s visit, Amy Brittain, one of The Post’s investigative reporters who had broken the news of sexual misconduct allegations against the television anchor Charlie Rose, drafted a letter to Mr. Baron in Google Docs expressing her discomfort with what she described as the “spectacle” surrounding the N.B.A. star’s newsroom appearance, according to an internal email that was reviewed by The New York Times.
Ms. Brittain, who did not reply to requests for comment, shared the Google Doc with others at the paper. More than 100 of her colleagues signed their names, according to two people with knowledge of the letter. But she ended up not sending it to Mr. Baron, opting to meet with him privately to share her concerns, a person with knowledge of the meeting said.
The Post declined to comment.
The contingent who was not pleased with the visit pointed to the 2003 case against Mr. Bryant, who was charged with felony sexual assault after an encounter with a 19-year-old front-desk clerk at a hotel near Vail, Colo. The criminal case was dropped in 2004. In a statement through his lawyer, Mr. Bryant said at the time that he believed the encounter was “consensual,” but he added that he had come to understand that she did not see it the same way. The next year, Mr. Bryant reached a settlement with the accuser in a separate civil suit. The terms were not disclosed.
Mr. Bryant tried to rebuild his public image. But as his growing success on the court won him new fans, not everyone was ready to offer him the uncomplicated fan worship that attended star players like Michael Jordan and Shaquille O’Neal. When “Dear Basketball,” an animated short produced by Mr. Bryant, was nominated for an Oscar in 2018, more than 17,000 people signed an online petition urging the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to rescind the nomination. The film went on to win an Oscar.
The activism against the film stemmed from the #MeToo movement, which was fueled, in part, by deeply reported articles from many publications, including The Post. A year before Mr. Bryant’s newsroom visit, the paper had published an investigation of the sexual misconduct allegations against Roy Moore, the former Alabama Supreme Court chief justice who was running for a United States Senate seat. Post reporters had also published articles on sexual misconduct allegations against other powerful men.
The tweet in the hours after Mr. Bryant’s death from Ms. Sonmez, the Post reporter who was briefly suspended, included a link to a 2016 Daily Beast article on the 2003 case. Almost immediately, she found herself on the receiving end of online abuse, including death threats, at a time when tributes to Mr. Bryant poured in from President Trump, former President Barack Obama, former President Bill Clinton and celebrities including Ellen DeGeneres, Whoopi Goldberg and Taylor Swift.
Hundreds of Ms. Sonmez’s colleagues objected to the suspension the next day partly because, as stated in the letter to Mr. Baron and the managing editor, Tracy Grant, Ms. Sonmez’s tweet was “a statement of fact.” The Post’s social media guidelines ask journalists to be informative and factual in their online posts.
Mr. Baron sent an email to Ms. Sonmez on Sunday telling her, “A real lack of judgment to tweet this. Please stop. You’re hurting this institution by doing this.” On Tuesday, the newspaper reversed course, saying in a statement that, after a review, it had concluded that Ms. Sonmez “was not in clear and direct violation of our social media policy.”
The Post’s statement also referred to her tweets as “ill-timed” and continued: “We consistently urge restraint, which is particularly important when there are tragic deaths.”