The Unknown Hostess of 1930s Hollywood
THE SUN AND HER STARS
Salka Viertel and Hitler’s Exiles in the Golden Age of Hollywood
By Donna Rifkind
The Galician-born actress turned American screenwriter Salka Viertel was never famous, but she always made things possible for her friends who were. Still, her name usually hovers in the realm of the footnote or fleeting aside, bobbing up in Thomas Mann’s diaries, Charlie Chaplin’s autobiography, Bertolt Brecht’s journals and in a Grand Hotel-scaled heap of books about Greta Garbo.
The role she played in both Golden Age Hollywood and transplanted Weimar high culture was crucial if vaporous. As a remarkable crew of European artists and intellectuals fled Nazism and streamed toward Southern California in the 1930s, Viertel worked in dozens of behind-the-scenes ways to help these desperate, gifted people — first scrambling to arrange visas and raise money on their behalf; later offering introductions, companionship, housing, wedges of superior chocolate cake and much more. Her Sunday afternoon Santa Monica gatherings became the stuff of local legend, with Viertel supplying what one observer called the “social glue” that bound the émigrés into a community. Or, as another of her intimates put it: “The history of Hollywood … is incomplete without an appreciation of Salka Viertel’s distinct talent for human relationships.”
Viertel is, in short, a terrific subject for a biography, and the veteran book reviewer Donna Rifkind has done well to focus her first full-length effort on this fascinating if little-known personality. Rifkind sees the worldly yet unassuming Viertel as at once an extraordinary character and a telling representative of something larger than herself. She’s right to.
Though most of “The Sun and Her Stars” unfolds in the United States of an earlier, anxious era — when hostility toward “others” of every sort reached a shrill crescendo — Rifkind clearly means to hold a mirror to our stranger-suspecting moment as well. She’s eager to emphasize just how much Hollywood and America in general owe to immigrants, many refugees among them. This fact has been articulated countless times before, but the dark underscoring that Rifkind provides feels unfortunately necessary these days.
A labor of love and careful research, the book gets off to a shaky start. Rifkind’s prose can be clumsy, and it’s especially ungainly at the outset: “In the end, none of this has been deemed thus far to be worthy of our attention”; “Murnau’s pictorial language pulses throughout American film history, engraved on the work of Alfred Hitchcock and Werner Herzog and continuing more recently in the work of Terrence Malick and Barry Jenkins.” Extended passages rely far too heavily on paraphrase of Viertel’s marvelous 1969 memoir, “The Kindness of Strangers.” Rifkind repeatedly renders flat approximations of Viertel’s own elegant sentences and leans far too often on that canny, first-person account for progression of thought, action and image. The problem may be one of overidentification. In these early sections, Rifkind seems to lack the necessary critical distance and appears content to trot dutifully behind her perspicacious heroine, repeating after her.
Something startling and powerful happens, though, midway through the book. As the historical situation Rifkind describes grows increasingly dire, she snaps to: Her writing sharpens and her gaze widens to take in a boggling Who’s Who of uprooted 20th-century eminences.
Everyone from the Mann brothers (Thomas and Heinrich) to Theodor Adorno, Arnold Schoenberg, Charles Laughton, Christopher Isherwood and Aldous Huxley surfaces in Viertel’s living room. As they do, Rifkind draws skillfully from multiple sources, expanding her sympathies to include them all — wives and lovers, too — in her melancholy narrative. That generosity of spirit and attention to detail suit a book about this “mother of exiles,” who was always welcoming outsiders in.