When Bernie Sanders Came to Visit
Subscribe to “The Choice” on your favorite listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | Pocket Casts | Stitcher
In the new podcast, “The Choice,” from NYT Opinion, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont was the first candidate to visit the editorial board for an endorsement interview. He presented his vision of ambitious progress for America. The editorial board challenged him to detail how that vision would be executed, especially given his age, his lukewarm record on bipartisan achievements and the deeply polarized state of the nation. The board pressed Senator Sanders over issues from foreign policy and climate change to antitrust regulation and gun violence, and questions on health policy that went beyond his well-known Medicare for all proposal. Plus: cancel culture, the Twitter world and birthday calls.
Then, tune in to the bonus deliberation episode, below, to hear the board’s reaction to this interview, and for a deep dive into the health care proposals on the table in the 2020 election.
To read the unabridged transcript from the board’s interview with Senator Sanders, click here.
A limited-run, twice-daily podcast that brings you inside the Times boardroom with the primary election candidates on the job interview of a lifetime. In the weekdays leading up to the Iowa caucuses, the editorial board is releasing a different Democratic candidate’s private endorsement interview, as well as a bonus episode featuring the board’s deliberation and a deep dive into an important aspect of the 2020 race. Our finale, on Jan. 30, will take you through the board’s consideration of each candidate and an explanation as to why it came to its final decision.
Watch the board come to their decision on the Jan. 19 episode of “The Weekly,” available on FX and Hulu, and in these areas outside the U.S.
The New York Times editorial board is made up of opinion journalists who rely on research, debate and individual expertise to reach a shared view of important issues. The board does not speak for the newsroom or The Times as a whole. Rather, amid the contending individual voices of Times Opinion, it aims to provide a consistent, independent view of the world based on time-tested institutional values.
Click to learn more about the editorial board, its members and their endorsement process.
Listen, subscribe, rate and review “The Choice” on your podcast listening app:
Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | PocketCasts | Stitcher | RadioPublic | Castbox | Himalaya | Luminary | Overcast | Podyssey