Always Look on the Bright Side of Impeachment
Gail Collins: Bret, there are only two subjects in our current political world: impeachment and the Democratic presidential race. Both are certainly … exciting.
I know you’re as eager to see Donald Trump kicked out of the White House as I am, but despite all the heavy drama on the impeachment front, it isn’t going to happen. Any words of comfort?
Bret Stephens: Hi, Gail. Well, if a global perspective helps make our domestic predicament seem less gloomy, tens of millions of people are under quarantine in China as the country struggles to come to grips with a deadly virus. In the immortal words of Eric Idle, “always look on the bright side of life.”
Gail: “If life seems jolly rotten, there’s something you’ve forgotten …” Oh yeah, the economy. Getting sort of tired of trying to take comfort from the stock market.
Bret: As for the Senate trial, it’s a bit like watching a recording of a football game when you already know the final score, at least within a point or two. Is it going to be 46-54 on the first count, and 47-53 on the second? Or the other way around? The only suspense here is whether the eye-popping disclosures in John Bolton’s memoir — the ones telling us, for the umpteenth time, that Trump is lying through his teeth about his shakedown of Ukraine — will sway any of the Republican senators.
Gail: I have to admit the Bolton revelation — which, as you point out, is a big moment but not exactly a big surprise — perked me up. But one of the many downsides of the Senate trial is the amount of time people are having to spend contemplating the heart and mind of Susan Collins.
Bret: Or Lamar Alexander and Mitt Romney. About the most we can hope for is that Bolton will somehow get a chance to testify, and that a majority of Americans might be swayed that Trump should be removed from office, no matter how the Senate votes. But the polls seem pretty evenly divided and haven’t yet factored in his defense. I fear the likeliest outcome is that Trump emerges from the trial stronger politically and, if it’s possible, even more shameless.
Gail: Hey, what happened to the bright side of life? Not sure the impact is going to be all that great for Trump politically — he needs more than the base to get re-elected. And even he knows, deep down in his little bitty heart, that he’s going to go down in history as a terrible president.
Let’s move over to the Democrats. I have to congratulate you for taking Bernie Sanders seriously before I did. It’s really beginning to look as if he could win the nomination.
Bret: According to the RealClearPolitics average for the Iowa caucuses, Joe Biden remains strongly competitive, and a recent poll by USA Today/Suffolk even has him comfortably in the lead there. And particularly in a caucus, you never really know.
Gail: Yeah, we’ll be on the edge of our seats next week, waiting to hear what the four Klobuchar people in the gym decide to do when she falls off the edge.
It seems appropriate that a political process ending with a vote by the Electoral College begins with the Iowa caucuses. Just to be sure nobody ever gets the impression this is just about the will of the people.
Bret: The Times/Siena poll has Sanders up by a whopping 7 percentage points. And Sanders’s lead in New Hampshire is even more solid, meaning he’ll be entering the rest of the primary and caucus season with some Big Mo.
Gail: Wow, Trump vs. Sanders. This is when I am forced to inter forever my theory that women won’t vote for guys who yell because they remind them of their worst boyfriends. We could actually be cruising toward the Battle of the Bad Dates.
Bret: That could be its own reality TV show, Gail, if it isn’t already.
The more important advantage for Sanders is that there’s no doubting where he stands. I’m obviously no fan of what he stands for, but he has ideas and convictions that are unequivocal, authentic, easy to understand and based on a powerful moral sensibility. That’s the essence of good politics. None of the other Democrats have quite that combination. Biden’s political flaw is that, like John McCain in 2008, he’s running on experience and character, not ideas and policies. Elizabeth Warren’s flaw is that she’s Pepsi to Sanders’s Coke — the same stuff, more or less, but not quite as authentic.
Gail: I’ve got to defend Warren. She’s the one who actually tries to envision working out her big ideas in the real world. Most of the nation first saw her fighting for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and she was really drawn into politics to promote her proposals.
Bret: That’s true. And it’s noteworthy that she’s taken a great deal more flak than Sanders merely for putting out more detailed proposals of ideas they both share. Maybe it’s on account of an underlying sexism. Or maybe it’s because she was simply taken far more seriously as a politically viable candidate than Sanders was up until about a month ago.
As for the other candidates, I fear they are fading in the rearview mirror. Am I wrong about that?
Gail: Not sure but it’s weird how much time people are spending debating vice-presidential favorites. Would Biden pick Kamala Harris or Amy Klobuchar?
Bret: Klobuchar, please. Biden needs to win voters in the Midwest, not in California. And Harris proved to be an inept candidate.
Gail: Any chance for Cory Booker?
Bret: Could be, but he also caught about as much fire in this race as a wet log. If I were Biden and I wanted to have an African-American running mate who conveys a sense of seriousness and reliability — the things you look for in a veep — a smart choice would be Eric Holder. Or, even better, Charles Bolden, the former Marine general and NASA astronaut and administrator.
Gail: This is no small matter when your two leading presidential contenders are in their late 70s, one recently recovered from a heart attack.
Bret: I keep hearing that 80 is the new 60! Good news for us all.
Gail: Mike Bloomberg has found his real role. Once he gives up campaigning for himself, he’s clearly going to shift his financial support to whoever the Democratic nominee turns out to be. And even Mike knows it ain’t gonna be him.
You’re a big fan of Mayor Pete, but this is a guy who’s getting his game ready for 2024 or 2028 or — hell, he could even be a player in 2060.
Bret: Right about when he’ll be as old as Bernie is today! And I’m sure the former mayor will be running even then.
Gail: We’ve still got a way to go before the ticket is set, though. Iowa! New Hampshire! South Carolina! God, I have so many memories — like John McCain after winning New Hampshire in 2000, standing next to the airplane that was going to fly him to South Carolina, looking as if somebody had hit him over the head with a skillet. I think he was more stunned than anyone.
That New Hampshire primary, with McCain just driving around the state, giving town halls about campaign finance reform and talking with reporters on the bus between stops, was the best political event I ever covered. How about you? Any primary blasts from the past?
Bret: My background was almost entirely on the foreign policy end, so I never covered primary races the way you did. But I’d always meet with the candidates — Republicans, mostly — whenever they trooped into our offices at The Wall Street Journal. The most memorable meeting was, of course, with Donald Trump, who couldn’t seem to answer a single question in a remotely coherent or non-narcissistic fashion. We walked out bemused and appalled and convinced he would eventually fade, which, well, tells you how much pundits really know about politics.
Gail: Yeah, when Trump came to The Times for his first meet-the-presidential-candidate event, he walked up to me and said: “You have never been nice to me!” or something to that effect. We go back a ways.
And then he went on to answer questions, all of which made it clear that his position on virtually every issue was based on when he got the most applause at campaign stops. I guarantee you that’s the story on abortion and gun rights.
Bret: And nearly every other subject. I think it’s why he loves his rallies. He’s picking up cues from them as much as they are from him.
Gail: My very first presidential campaign assignment was long, long ago at the New York Daily News — in 1987, when Gary Hart was a Democratic favorite until a sex scandal arose. You may have heard about the picture of him and Donna Rice on a boat called “Monkey Business.” Anyhow, he dropped out, then tried to get back in. His poor wife Lee was with him, attempting to look supportive as they dragged around New Hampshire searching for some voters to talk to. They had no money or staff, let alone a press bus.
Didn’t give me much insight into the campaign — Mike Dukakis won the nomination, God help us. But it did get me started working on a book about political sex scandals.
Bret: I remember that campaign pretty well, though I was barely a teenager when it all went down. It now seems sort of quaint in this age of Who-cares-if-the-president-of-the-United-States-had-an-affair-with-a-porn-star-shortly-after-his-third-wife-gave-birth-to-their-son-and-that-he-later-paid-said-porn-star-more-than-one-hundred-grand-in-hush-money-in-naked-violation-of-campaign-finance-laws-right-before-his-election-for-which-he-was-named-an-unindicted-co-conspirator-by-the-Southern-District-of-New-York-while-his-fixer-landed-in-prison.
My question is, are we better today for being so much less judgmental about these things, or not?
Gail: Well first — kudos on your hyphenation extravaganza.
Bret: Just stop me when I revert to ALL CAPS.
Gail: And about the scandals — voters could always hear rumors about politicians’ sexual indiscretions. You just had to walk into the right tavern around 1800 and you’d hear salacious songs about Thomas Jefferson’s affair with “Dusky Sally” — his slave at Monticello, Sally Hemings.
Bret: Or his archrival Alexander Hamilton, for that matter.
Gail: Americans always focus on the bad-character stories about politicians they were prepared to dislike anyhow. And they ignore the others unless it’s forced on them — like Bill Clinton being impeached for lying about his sex life.
I have lots of friends who will rant about Trump’s extramarital affairs and grabby little hands. But they’d happily overlook infidelity in their favorite Democratic candidates.
Except, now that I think of it, we don’t have a whole lot of sex gossip on the Democratic side this time around. Do you think it’s because so many of them are so old?
Bret: Maybe it’s to do with rising awareness around #MeToo issues. I suspect that any candidate who knew he — it’s almost always “he” — had a #MeToo issue also knew better than to run. But it also speaks to the great switcheroo in American politics, which is that it is now the Democratic Party that cares about issues of moral character and sexual propriety, and the Republican Party that, well, doesn’t.
Gail: It is pretty amazing how the evangelicals have managed to ignore all the Trump morality messes. Unless you accept my theory that American voters are incredibly practical and don’t care if politicians follow the right values in private as long as they pass the right laws in public.
But I like your switcheroo analysis.
Bret: It holds for other things as well. Democrats were aghast when Trump decided to pull troops out of Syria. They are much tougher on Russia than many in the G.O.P. And they’re standing firm for the originalist view of the Constitution, certainly when it comes to impeachable offenses.
Gail, all Democrats need to do is come around on tax cuts, deregulation and a strong defense and we’ll never disagree again.