What Students Are Saying About What Kobe Bryant’s Death Means to Them
Please note: This post is part of The Learning Network’s ongoing Current Events Conversation feature. We invite students to react to the news via our daily writing prompts and, each week, we publish a selection of their comments.
This week in our writing prompts we asked teenagers about library books, being a tourist, quitting, and what they’re doing to improve their schools.
But no prompt garnered more responses than the one about the sudden and tragic death of basketball legend Kobe Bryant and his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, who were killed in a helicopter crash, along with seven others, on Jan. 26.
The question, “What Does Kobe Bryant’s Death Mean to You?” received more than 350 comments from young people around the country. It inspired emotional outpourings, tributes, letters and poems. Below, we’ve rounded up a selection of students’ reactions and reflections about what this story means to them.
While we usually highlight three of our most popular writing prompts in our Current Events Conversation, this week we are only featuring this one so we can honor the many students who wrote in.
We’d like to thank all the students who weighed in this week and to extend a special welcome to the new classes who joined us from Abington, Mass.; Centerville, Ohio; Dallas; Detroit; Fayetteville, N.C.; San Diego; and Waltham, Mass.
Please note: Student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear as they were originally submitted.
Dear Kobe,
Thank you.
Thank you for the commitment you gave,
And for the hard work you put in to playing.
Thank you for the thrills we got,
As you played your last game.
Thank you for the positive attitude,
Even on your worst days.
Thank you for the impact you made,
On the people that looked up to you.
Thank you for the excitement you gave,
As we watched you, every night, every game.
Thank you for the inspiration to dream big,
And to achieve the goals we set for ourselves.
Thank you for the mindset of never giving up,
Even we are weak.
Thank you for the life you shared with us,
On and off the court.
Thank you for showing the world,
That there is more to life than fame and fortune.
Thank you for leaving your mark,
In history, in basketball, and in our lives.
Thank you for being a loving father and husband,
And showing that family comes first always.
Thank you for giving the world all you had,
Every day and night you had on earth.
Thank you for being you.
Remember you forever and always,
Robert Molloy
— Robert Molloy, Abington Massachusetts
Kobe,
You are such an inspiration to me and the way in which you carried yourself, and approached to the game was just so special. Not only have you touched me but you touched millions and millions of others. I try the hardest to take the game just an ounce as serious as you took it, and mirror your approach just half as much as you did. It made me want to up my love for the game, and my seriousness for basketball. You taught how to be crazy and insane over basketball and to really make it your life.
I feel for your family, and pray that they find anywhere in their hearts and minds to keep pushing, as I know that you would want them to do. Your transition has really put things in perspective for me, and has made me really appreciate my family, myself, and everything and everyone that I show any type of affection towards.
It has also made me reach out to certain people who I may be on bad terms with, and apologize for whatever I have done to them, and patch things up. I hope that everyone in the world follows suit because no argument, ill words, and confrontation is worth being your last encounter with someone.
You are an icon, a loving father, a great husband, and the standard of greatness.
— Zavian McLean, Fayetteville, North Carolina
Kobe Bryant meant everything to the game of basketball. Have you ever thrown in the trash or recycle and yelled Kobe? Because I know I have. Our class actually had a special moment this morning at 8:24 because those were his numbers and then we all threw a ball of paper in the recycle and yelled “For Kobe.” I also know at recess, my first shot during a game I pulled up to the three point line and yelled “For Kobe.” For anyone who knows about Kobe Bryant, they know what he meant to the game of basketball.
— Gavin E., J.R. Masterman
My parents talk about where they were on 9-11 when the World Trade Center was hit. I think I will always remember where I was when I heard Kobe Bryant died. It was a beautiful Sunday afternoon when I finished surfing and saw the news on my Snapchat feed. As we walked to the car, everyone was talking about the news. We weren’t the only ones in shock.
When I first read the news, my stomach dropped as if I was on the helicopter with him. His death came out of nowhere — so unexpected and tragic. While he was idolized across the world, Kobe wasn’t just any old basketball star. He was known for being a great human on and off the court. On the court he was skilled player as well as a fierce and passionate competitor and team leader. I loved watching him play before he retired. Off the court, he was a genuine human being and wonderful dad and husband. He inspired me and many others to try hard and be the best version of myself.
Kobe touched so many people in his 41 years. It is sad that we will never know what he would have done. He really was gone too soon.
— William Hudson, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
Growing up, it wasn’t my choice whether I wanted to be a basketball fan or not. There would be nights where I was forced to watch a game because it was better than being kept awake by the loud sounds of the TV and my grandfather screaming at every shot. It was at that point that I truly developed a love for the game. And in my household, Kobe Bryant was WORSHIPPED.
In school, everybody at least knew his name for the sake of throwing paper across the room. I grew up with my grandfather telling me stories of when he first started as a player …
He may have dominated on the court, but he was also a great father, husband, author. He even made a movie! He was an amazing player, but a better person. Kobe Bryant will always be remembered.
— Bree Thomas, Julia R. Masterman, PA
The feelings I felt when I found out the death of Kobe Bryant can’t be explained by the words that come from my mouth. Being born in L.A, the Lakers were always the team being played on T.V, and watching Basketball I fell in love with the game, and seeing Kobe Bryant on the Lakers and how he played and changed the game, I looked up to him, he was my idol, and seeing that he’s passed with his 13 yr old daughter which was going to carry his legacy is so devastating to me.
I was just watching his highlights and interviews about him just before he passed and it really hurts just to see that. The amount of devotion and time he gave to what he enjoyed and loved was ridiculous and he always gave the best advice to be able to get to where you want.
This whole situation is such a devastating time, and watching his highlights and interviews won’t be the same anymore because the emotion I carry from that. This is such a heartbreak, and I can’t say anything else other than he is loved and his name will live forever. R.I.P the legend himself, Kobe Bryant.
— Zac Booker, Dallas
The fact that there were thousands of people chanting to show their thanks and gratitude towards Kobe gives an idea of just how big of a footprint he left, both in basketball and in life. When I was thinking about his passing, I remembered a quote. It goes something like, “Good players win races, Great players break records, Legends change the game.” This has everything to do with Kobe Bryant. Someone who changed the game of basketball in and of itself, and a role model for people, even those who have never held a basketball in their life.
— Valeria, J.R. Masterman
… I will never forget all the times I spent watching his games, trying to do his trademark fadeaway jumpshot (unsuccessfully), and yelling “KOBE” as I tragically missed paper ball shots into the trash can. The only thing I can think to say is thank you. I thank him for inspiring me to want to work for something and helping me get into basketball.
— Kevin O’Malley, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
Too young to die. That is what I thought when I heard about Kobe Bryant’s death. Fame. Talent. Money. Love. Respect. He had everything and in one instant it was gone. Poof.
— Ms Song’s class, Waltham, MA
Kobe’s death meant a lot to me. One because I play basketball and he was someone I looked up too, and two because I knew just like everyone else in the world that his horrific death was more than basketball.
To also see that he lost his daughter and many more friends and others in the crash is what made the situation worse. Someone lost a husband, a father, sisters, and friends, that isn’t something that could just fly over someone’s head, which really makes you think. Don’t take life for granted because everyone has their own time and it’s sad to see his had come so soon. Kobe Bean Bryant, gone too soon.
— Lavell Styles, Detroit, MI
Honestly Kobe’s death kind of affected me. Because his family lost a father and a daughter. I can’t imagine the pain his family is facing right now. And it’s really heartbreaking. This teaches us, that we have to value life, our family, our friends because we don’t know when it would be our last day in this earth.
— Daisy, Dallas
I am a fan of basketball, but I was never a huge fan of Kobe but I’ve known him and admired his skill. After he retired, I thought he would have a calm life with his family. I thought his daughter Gianna would go to the WNBA and continue on his legacy. Now both of them are gone. RIP Kobe
— Audrey, PA
I was never a Kobe Bryant fan personally, but his death still impacted me heavily. Honestly, I had a bit of an existential crisis in realizing how easily your life could be cut short. His daughter was only 13 and had her whole life ahead of her. It makes me realize how ultimately fragile life is, and at any given moment, something catastrophic could happen that can end your life.
It makes me scared, very scared, but I also know that because life is such a fragile thing, I have to make sure I make the best of it. I can’t spend my entire life being scared, and instead I have to live my life to the fullest, like Kobe and his daughter, so I can leave behind a legacy or something of the sort. It sounds very cliche, but it’s true.
— Tori Okorodudu, J.R Masterman, Philadelphia, PA
I feel especially horrible for Gianna since she was only 13, my age. She never got to live out her full life, let alone make it to high school. I saw a post of someone who had an idea to make Gianna the new logo of the WNBA, or consider her an honorary draftee since it was her dream to play in the WNBA, but that never got to happen. I thought that was an excellent idea, and I hope that can become a reality.
— Marisa Maisano, J.R. Masterman
What hit home the most for me was learning that Kobe’s daughter Gigi was on board also. Just through social media, you can tell that Kobe loved being a father and a coach to his 4 girls. It’s truly tragic. Jay Williams said it best that we must learn to put outside our differences and live each day with a purpose free of hate or prejudice, and take inspiration from the great Kobe Bryant and Gigi, a star in the making.
— Greyson M, Glenbard West HS Glen Ellyn, Illinois
I am a basketball fan, and personally for my generation Kobe meant the world to the game … He really was a great example to look up to as a professional sports player with his Mamba Mentality. I still remember when I saw Kobe score 60 points in his last game I felt inspired to be great. Him coming from being a Philly kid to being an NBA superstar, moved me even more. His life is an example to my generation that you can change the world by doing anything you want to accomplish. He showed to never give up and to always work hard to be able to succeed.
— Izel, J.R. Masterman
I’m a soccer player who plays a game that has an entirely different culture than basketball has. I never grew up watching the NBA and I never idolized Kobe because he didn’t play a sport that interested me. Despite this, Kobe was still a shining example of what one can accomplish with dedication and hard work. His mentality, preparation, and desire to succeed were unparalleled not only on the court, but in every sport. His mentality is something that I can learn from and apply to both my athletic performances and attitude about how I can approach everything in life.
— Sam McNamara, John T. Hoggard High (Wilmington, NC)
Kobe Bryant’s death meant a lot to me. I have never been a huge basketball fan, but I did love Kobe. I’ve only seen my dad cry once before this, at his mom’s funeral. Seeing my dad cry uncontrollably over Kobe’s death was very life-changing. Kobe was from Philadelphia, where I live, and even went to the same school as my dad and uncles, Lower Merrion.
My dad said to me last night, “Los Angeles can claim Kobe all they want, but just remember that he is from Philly. His dad was from Philly and raised him to have a Philly work ethic. Work hard to get what you want.” That hit me very hard and put everything into perspective for me. Kobe, Gianna, and the 7 others that lost their lives on that helicopter will be greatly missed. Rest easy💜💛.
— Jayden Vance, J.R. Masterman
I learned a lot from Kobe. The biggest thing I learned from him was to always keep pushing forward and always work hard and don’t let anyone get in the way of you and your work.
— Christian, Detroit
For many kids, including me, Kobe Bryant was the first thing they knew about basketball. Being such a legendary player, it was hard to not know the name when being involved in sports. When throwing a paper ball into the trash can, yelling “Kobe!” would make the chances of it going in much higher than if we didn’t yell his name. Even if you didn’t play basketball or sports in general, you most likely yelled this man’s name at least once. And for those who did play, Kobe was an idol, a player to look up to.
As I got a little older, around eleven years old, I realized how special Kobe really was. This was not only a legendary player but a man who could speak different languages, a man who stood up for women’s sports, and a man with an amazing work ethic like no one else. It’s hard to understand how incredible he was when I was eight, as I only saw him as a great player, but since then, I’ve realized he’s more than just a player.
— Jason Noel, Centerville, OH
I have next to no interest in sports, but Kobe’s name has often been shouted out whenever someone in my class throws out trash. I have wondered why it’s Kobe’s name that is said and not another basketball star’s, and after reading this article, it’s clearly in part because of his talent at basketball, but I also think it’s because of his inspiring story: he was drafted right when he finished high school, at a pretty young age, which I think gives young athletes and really anyone looking for success hope that you can do anything, no matter what age you are.
— Jason Zhang, Masterman
Kobe is more than just a basketball icon. He’s been an inspiration to kids for ongoing years. His talent shone through his hard work and dedication to the game and what he loves. He’s a model to parents, demonstrated a loving and caring father daughter relationship with his girls.
— Avery Lemley, Hoggard High School in Wilmington, NC
I have never really watched Kobe or even been a fan of basketball but I know how important he was to many. He was an inspirational basketball who did not only play basketball, but he also cared for everyone who looked up to him. His family. His fans. Also ones he didn’t even know. He inspired everyone to not give up on their dreams no matter what and to be successful it takes patience and time.
— Auriel H, Detroit, MI
When I first heard about the news of Kobe Bryant’s death from a friend, I didn’t believe him. I thought it was just another prank that someone was pulling for attention. When I saw that it was real, I was devastated.
Kobe Bryant was more than a basketball player. He was a role model for not only other players but for the basketball community. His work ethic and his mentality was something that everyone should aim for. Although the death of Kobe is tragic, he left a big mark on the world that will always be remembered. I will always remember the times where he persevered and sacrificed for the better good.
— Joshua, New Hyde Park
I saw Kobe in real life he is a cheerful and positive person. He inspired me to keep going and never give up.
— Kevin, Detroit
I vaguely follow basketball, but I wouldn’t say I’m a big fan. However, Kobe Bryant is a legend and known globally, basketball connoisseur or not. It broke my heart to hear about all the details of it, making me sob outwardly for a moment. Even today, when we were shown his award-winning short film ‘Dear Basketball’ in class, I started to cry.
I have not had an idol very dear to my heart die, but idols I have known about have. No matter who, any celebrity death absolutely destroys me inside. These people have made so many others happy, and knowing that they’re gone, just like that, hurts so much. The only way we can remember and preserve the memory of these amazing idols is by passing their story along. Kobe Bryant will always be known as a legend and a great for the rest of basketball’s life.
— Erika Zeng, J.R. Masterman
The death of Kobe Bryant was greater than just the death of a man, it was the death of our “mamba mentality,” our role model. Kobe Bryant will always be remembered for the 5 championships that he brought to the Los Angeles Lakers, but even more importantly, he will be remembered as an idol and a global game changer.
From his Oscar award to his Nonprofit organization, Kobe Bryant was someone who wanted to make an impact on the world, and one of the saddest parts of his passing was he had so much more to contribute to this world and unfortunately we will not be able to see it.
Being a die hard basketball fan, Kobe dying was something that was very devastating for me, but my mindset has truly changed after it. Kobe was always the lost guy on the court, he was very hardworking, and just like him I want to develop that mamba mentality in everything aspect of my life, beyond that I want to be able to cherish all the small things in my life. Because like Kobe, one minute everything can be fine but in an instant it can just vanish.
Although Kobe’s death was very devastating, his daughter Gianna’s death was equally as devastating. This is because she had so much potential and really wanted to make an impact in the world of basketball especially for woman.
In the face of any obstacle, I will not have Gianna and Kobe in my head to ultimately accomplish all my goals and overcome obstacles because that is what Kobe would have wanted Gianna to do, something he would encourage me to do.
— Zain Dhatwani, Glenbard West H.S, Glen Ellyn, IL
This tragedy has made us as a nation realize that we need to value the times with our loved ones because they can easily be stripped from our lives in a matter of seconds. We need to all reach out and tell our loved ones how much we value and appreciate their presence in our lives because a tragedy like this one can strike at any moment especially when we least expect it.
— Nico Spadavecchia, Glenbard West Highschool Glen Ellyn IL
If you can take anything away from this tragedy, take this: life is too short to hold grudges with the people that matter, learn to forgive. You never know when it’ll be the last time, always say I love you and always cherish every moment you spend with the people around you. As Kobe said “ You asked for my hustle, I gave you my heart.” Never stop giving.
— Alexis Lopez, Glenbard West Hs Glen Ellyn, IL