Fears of War After Killing of Iranian General
To the Editor:
Re “U.S. Strike in Iraq Kills Commander of Iranian Force” (front page, Jan. 3):
Is it any surprise that, as the case for President Trump’s removal from office grows stronger, the headlines announce presidential actions that essentially represent a unilateral declaration of war? It takes no prescience to predict that escalating political pressures would lead to increasingly reckless efforts at distraction by the president.
War is the ultimate distraction, and there is little doubt that the assassination of Qassim Suleimani directed by Mr. Trump will lead to violent retaliations by those who saw him as a protector and leader.
Once again, Mr. Trump will claim justification for this action, purportedly taken to end increasing violence that he himself initiated by ending the nuclear agreement with Iran and imposing sanctions.
Removal of this president is no longer a partisan issue. It is an existential issue.
Charles Q. Sullivan
Milwaukee
To the Editor:
The Trump administration’s targeted assassination of Iran’s top military leader, Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani — carried out without congressional authorization or any serious consideration of the consequences — is its latest step toward an avoidable and disastrous war with Iran. It doesn’t have to be this way.
Our current tensions with Iran can be traced back to the Trump administration’s abandonment of the Iran nuclear deal and its campaign of “maximum pressure” against Iran’s economy. Following these policies with a disproportionate attack on an Iranian-backed Iraqi militia has provoked virtually universal anti-United States sentiment in Iraq at a time when a popular uprising had been focusing its animus on the corrupt regime in Baghdad and its ties to the Iranian regime.
Rather than stepping back from an escalating spiral of attack and counterattack, the Trump administration killed General Suleimani, a move that has dramatically increased the prospects of a full-scale conflict that could cost trillions of dollars and hundreds of thousands of lives.
It’s time to step back from the brink and institute an urgent campaign of multilateral diplomacy. The last thing the world needs is yet another ill-considered and reckless Mideast war.
William D. Hartung
New York
The writer is the director of the Arms and Security Project at the Center for International Policy.
To the Editor:
It is reasonable to believe that this assassination would not have taken place if the United States were still a signee to the Iran nuclear deal. In his obsession to undo all Obama accomplishments, and cheered on by both domestic supporters and several Middle Eastern countries (who would delight in our fighting their war), President Trump threw aside the main path for dialogue with Iran. One could have predicted this outcome, as tensions have gradually ratcheted up.
With his ongoing domestic woes, President Trump seemed to need a distraction and something he hopes will rally support. One prays that the country is too smart for that and calmer minds prevail.
Gerald Pane
Amagansett, N.Y.