What’s on TV Saturday: ‘The Cave’ and a New ‘Sabrina’ Season
THE CAVE (2019) 9 p.m. on National Geographic. “There is no endgame here,” Ben Kenigsberg said of this documentary in The New York Times. Feras Fayaad, who was born in Syria, directed most of the film remotely, relying on cinematographers to record the lives of Dr. Amani Ballour and her patients in a secret, underground hospital outside Damascus. A hero in the film and in her community, Ballour is one of the rare women doctors in the country, and she is constantly challenged for it. This is the least of her worries in the hospital, known as the cave. Above ground — where war planes are zooming overhead — the demolition caused by bombings, malnutrition and chemical attacks brings Syrians of all ages to her care, where all she can do is her best.
UFOS: TOP SECRET EVIDENCE REVEALED 8 p.m. on History. This feature adds to one of America’s favorite conspiracy theories, and aims to expose any government involvement with and knowledge of extraterrestrial life. By presenting never-before-seen evidence — a manual called SOM 1-01 — experts discuss the possibility of a U.F.O. cover-up by the government and question if everything we’ve been told about aliens is true.
CHILLING ADVENTURES OF SABRINA Stream on Netflix. In this Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa reboot of “Sabrina the Teenage Witch,” the fate of hell, heaven and Earth sits on the shoulders of a girl who must choose between ruling the underworld and saving her boyfriend from Lucifer, who also happens to be her father. It’s a lot for a teenage half-mortal who, when the series began three seasons ago, wasn’t sure she wanted to submit her soul to the Dark Lord in the first place. Since then, Sabrina (Kiernan Shipka) has defeated Lucifer — though he is trapped within the body of her boyfriend, Nicholas (Gavin Leatherwood) — which poses a problem. She now faces a coronation as Queen of the Underworld to save her town and coven from an evil prince and some destructive pagans. In her review for The Times, Margaret Lyons wrote that “Sabrina” “knows what ‘The Craft’ knew, which is that teenage girl rage is a powerful force.”
GREAT EXPECTATIONS (1947) Stream on Criterion. David Lean directs this Charles Dickens classic about a young orphan named Pip (Anthony Wagner/John Mills), who, with the help of a mysterious benefactor and motivation from his childhood love interest, undertakes a journey toward becoming a gentleman. It’s the quintessential coming-of-age tale Dickens is known for, and Lean received praise for this adaptation. Bosley Crowther wrote highly of the film in his review for The Times, saying, “The fullness of Dickens, of his stories and characters — his humor and pathos and vitality and all his brilliant command of atmosphere — has never been so illustrated as it is in this wonderful film, which can safely be recommended as screen story-telling at its best.”