Stephanie Parze: Ex-Boyfriend Confessed to Her Killing in Suicide Note
The night before Halloween, Stephanie Parze was out with family and friends. Then, she vanished. The police investigating the 25-year-old woman’s sudden disappearance from her home in New Jersey quickly zeroed in on her ex-boyfriend.  
The man, John Ozbilgen, 29, and Ms. Parze had an on-and-off relationship, officials said. The month before Ms. Parze’s disappearance, he had been arrested and accused of assaulting her. The day before she was last seen alive, Mr. Ozbilgen sent Ms. Parze angry and profane text messages that went unanswered.
By mid-November, after an exhaustive search for Ms. Parze, the authorities had all but concluded that Mr. Ozbilgen was responsible for her disappearance, the Monmouth County prosecutor said on Monday.
Their suspicions were confirmed after Mr. Ozbilgen was found dead by suicide at his home on Nov. 22, where he left a note admitting his involvement in the killing of Ms. Parze, said the prosecutor, Christopher J. Gramiccioni, at a news conference.
“John Ozbilgen was responsible for the homicide of Stephanie Parze,” Mr. Gramiccioni said, hours after the authorities announced that they had found Ms. Parze’s remains on Sunday in a wooded area not far from her home.
The discovery of the young woman’s body brought an end to a hunt that gripped people around the region, especially as Ms. Parze’s parents made heartfelt pleas for information about her disappearance.
On Monday, Ms. Parze’s father, Ed, choked back tears as he thanked officers and members of the community for their months of searching and support.
“Stephanie is home — she’s coming home at last, right where she belongs,” he said, as his  wife, Sharleen, wiped away tears. “And we have God to thank.”
Ms. Parze was last seen alive on Oct. 30. She stopped briefly at her parents’ house and after saying goodbye, headed to her home a few miles away.
The next day, she did not show up for a babysitting job or respond to phone calls or text messages. At her home in Freehold Township, investigators found her car in her driveway, her dog inside the house and her cellphone on the couch.
The police and Ms. Parze’s family launched an extensive search for clues that crossed state lines. Investigators from multiple agencies canvassed hundreds of acres in areas ranging from Freehold, which is about 50 miles south of Manhattan, to Staten Island, where Mr. Ozbilgen once lived.
Over the course of their investigation, detectives searched Mr. Ozbilgen’s home in New Jersey five times, Mr. Gramiccioni said on Monday. Officials discovered that he had been charged three times in domestic violence incidents, including the one against Ms. Parze.
According to a criminal complaint, Ms. Parze told the police that Mr. Ozbilgen had attacked her after she tried to break up with him. He hit Ms. Parze on her hand and on the side of her head “using his backhand.”
Ms. Parze told the police that she worried Mr. Ozbilgen would assault her again, the complaint said. Prosecutors later learned that on Oct. 29, the night before Ms. Parze was last seen alive, Mr. Ozbilgen sent her a series of angry text messages and Facebook messages.
As they looked for clues in Ms. Parze’s case, the police searched Mr. Ozbilgen’s phone and discovered at least one image of child pornography on his phone. They arrested him and charged him with possessing child pornography on Nov. 8.
Mr. Ozbilgen was released on Nov. 19, after a hearing at which prosecutors said publicly that he was a person of interest in Ms. Parze’s disappearance.
Three days later, he was found dead at his home in Freehold in a suicide, officials said.
Mr. Gramiccioni, the prosecutor, said that investigators searching the home found a note that Mr. Ozbilgen left for his parents. In it, he wrote that he “had had enough and that he could not do life in prison,” Mr. Gramiccioni said.
Mr. Ozbilgen also told his parents that what they would hear in the news in the coming days was true, except for the child pornography charges, Mr. Gramiccioni said.
A lawyer for Mr. Ozbilgen’s family, Rick Incremona, confirmed that a note was left for Mr. Ozbilgen’s parents. He declined to discuss its exact comments and said that Mr. Ozbilgen’s parents sympathies’ were with Ms. Parze’s family.
Mr. Ozbilgen was never charged in connection with Ms. Parze’s death. Mr. Gramiccioni said that the authorities believed he acted alone.
”Ozbilgen acknowledged that he had dug himself a deep hole and wrote at the end of his note that this was the only choice,” Mr. Gramiccioni said.
The note did not provide any information about Ms. Parze’s remains. Though prosecutors informed Ms. Parze’s parents of Mr. Ozbilgen’s note at the time, they did not share it publicly because they were still conducting an active homicide investigation, Mr. Gramiccioni said.
For months, the Parze family and associates continued to conduct searches for Ms. Parze’s remains, an effort that involved hundreds of people that Mr. Parze referred to as “Steph’s Angels.” They posted fliers and photos along U.S. Route 9 as they pleaded for information.
On Sunday afternoon, two teenage boys walking along the side of Route 9 in Old Bridge, N.J., came across Ms. Parze’s body in a wooded area, officials said. The spot was near one where the police and others had previously searched.
“Two angels found her,” an emotional Mr. Parze said. “These two angels were put there for a purpose. That’s how we feel.”