Australian Open 2020: Matches to Watch on Friday Night (Into Saturday)
Sofia Kenin, the 14th seed, reached her first Grand Slam final by beating Ashleigh Barty, the world No. 1 and homegrown favorite at the Australian Open. Kenin and Barty both looked tentative in opening exchanges, but it was Kenin, the young American, who late in the first set began to take more initiative on points.
Kenin’s serve, which has been exceptional throughout the tournament, was once again on display and will need to remain a steady factor in her game to help her settle the nerves that can afflict any Grand Slam finalist.
Garbiñe Muguruza, unseeded at this year’s Australian Open, has become the first Spanish woman to reach the Australian Open since 1998. Her victory over Simona Halep, the fourth seed, in the semifinal on Thursday was one of her most convincing performances in years.
Halep, whose defensive skills are among the best on tour, was overpowered by Muguruza’s flattened baseline shots. Muguruza has now beaten three top 10 seeds on her way to the final, and is in remarkable form. After a few years of disappointing results, Muguruza reunited with her old coach Conchita Martínez, and has reaped the benefits. She looks more confident as she strives to win her third Grand Slam title.
Muguruza may have more experience than Kenin in Grand Slam finals, but insisted that “at the end, the racket has to speak out there.”
“It doesn’t matter how many Grand Slams you have, because it’s a tennis match,” she said. “I’ll take into consideration my previous experiences, but it doesn’t guarantee anything.”
With the belief that Kenin showed in her victory over Barty, it’s clear that she feels similarly. Although Kenin has gone past the fourth round of a Grand Slam tournament for the first time, she has shown almost no signs of being star-struck. Her intense belief that she belongs is valid. After this run to the final, she will break into the WTA top 10 for the first time in her career.
When the flat power game of Muguruza comes up against the counterpunching of Kenin, expect a passionate and exciting final: more than enough to keep viewers on the edge of their seats in the early hours of the morning.
Nikola Mektic and Barbora Krejcikova recovered from a set down to beat the higher-seeded Henri Kontinen and Gabriela Dabrowski in the semifinals. Krejcikova, who won the Australian Open alongside Rajeev Ram last year, has credited her countryman with keeping her motivated as she entered her third week of competition in Melbourne Park.
After qualifying for the singles draw, Krejcikova reached the second round before starting competition in both the women's and mixed doubles tournaments. This will be her 15th match in the past three weeks, and fatigue will surely be a factor. Mektic, the more experienced player in the pair, will have to be a stabilizing force if he is to win his first mixed doubles Grand Slam title.
Jamie Murray and Bethanie Mattek-Sands, who were unseeded, have advanced to their third Grand Slam mixed doubles final as a pair. In both of their previous appearances, at the United States Open in 2018 and 2019, the pair won the title. This is especially impressive for Mattek-Sands, who had a gruesome knee injury in 2017.
After taking out the top seeds, Marcelo Melo and Barbora Strycova, in the first round, Mattek-Sands and Murray have not dropped a set on the way to the final.
Their experience has shown throughout the tournament. Combined, the players hold 16 Grand Slam titles, and while they may not be at their physical peaks, Murray and Mattek-Sands are exceptionally crafty players who can drag their more energetic opponents around with precise and inventive shots.