Variety: Cryptic
CRYPTIC CROSSWORD — Perhaps this will be the year variety puzzles go viral — they’re due, and the puzzlesphere is expanding. Maybe there will be a 100th monkey effect at some point. In hopes of that, I’m going to keep going over these puzzles clue by clue so that anyone who’s interested and humble enough to just give themselves over to this process will be able to finish each puzzle. If that’s you, I’m glad you’re here. By the end of the year, you’ll know what you’re doing at least as well as I do, and your brain will be all the more flexible and powerful for it.
Before you go from total befuddlement at cryptic clues to reading these explanations, be sure to check out (and bookmark) this terrific solving guide, which guides you on your approach to each variety of clue. These puzzles are a peculiar species — they appear loopy and eccentric, but the rules behind the cluing are quite elegant and specific.
There is a middle ground between these cryptic puzzles and regular crosswords, called a “Puns and Anagrams” puzzle. I usually separate the two flavors of entries for those posts, but here I’ll just go in order. I’ll mark the clues that I found most challenging, as well — see if you agree, and when I misinterpret or miss something feel free to weigh in. I appreciate that.
1A: This is a “charades” clue — think of when you play said game and break a word down into parts, which you then frantically and silently define with gestures. Make “luncheon meat” into HAM; make “for each” into PER. The “picnic basket” is a HAMPER. Sounds a bit British? Well, it is a cryptic.
4A: Same clue flavor, different order. This time, the definition part of the clue is right at the front, “Inclination.” Make “write” PEN, and ”song” CHANT, to get PENCHANT. Now we’re borrowing from the French — quelle surprise!
9A: Here is our crossover clue — this clue relies on the same trick that the main Sunday crossword uses today as its theme. It’s one of this cryptic puzzle’s very few anagrams — Think “Union member,” then make “is not mean” dotty, or odd or eccentric, by shuffling those letters around to get MINNESOTA, a member of the United States.
11A: This was a brutal clue for me because I have lapses in my European geographical knowledge. It’s a double definition — “sovereign,” as a noun, is synonymous with a word that also happens to be the name of a Belgian city, LIÈGE. News to me, but this is a fascinating, ancient city and the cultural center of Wallonia, French Belgium.
12A: This is a homophone, and one of those forehead smackers where you can’t believe you didn’t get it sooner. If you’re coldhearted enough to consider a “scam artist’s victims” suckers, then you’ll pick up on its homophone SUCCORS, meaning “helps.”
13A: This is a (well-disguised) deletion, but you have to get a tricky definition here to see it — a “former privateer” is an ex-pirate. Take “runs off,” which means in this case to delete the “r” in pirate, and you’ll get EXPIATE, or “make amends.” The letters in “privateer” appearing in the crosses of this entry were quite confusing and made me think we had an anagram here, which we did not.
14A: The tip-off in this clue is “topless,” which will almost always indicate a deletion from the front of a word. In this case the word is “auntie;” take the top off (the “a”) to get UNTIE, which is a synonym for the poetic use of “loose.”
16A: A hidden word clue! These are little gifts in a cryptic, as the answer is literally right before your eyes, so much so that I subconsciously look for them everywhere when solving. “Eating” is the indicator here, as in, the answer is in the belly of the clue. “Ferrara violinist” gives you RAVIOLI, “Italian food.”
19A: Shout-out from the setter, Richard Silvestri — how nice. Also a sweet and accessible clue: Take the S in Sunday at the front of “cryptic lovers,” or l-o-v-e-r-s anagrammed, and get SOLVERS. Look at us beautiful solvers, honestly.
21A: A little bit of Italian, a little bit of abbreviation — “in Italy, the” is LA; “German” reduces to GER. Have a beer, a LAGER.
23A: This clue was one of the last I solved, although if you know that first definition it’s a piece of cake. If you think “rector” when you think “Churchman,” you just need to insert that “a” to get REACTOR.
25A: This is also a bit tricky, if you tended to group “Very large bird” and look for something like an “emu,” “moa” or “rhea,” classic word game fodder. Instead, “Very large” is the definition part of the clue, and there are two steps to solve it. The bird is a little one, a “tit”; then “I can” gets in a “stew,” or a scramble, to contribute to TITANIC.
27A: A very clean, very simple homophone tucked into this corner: “Belonging to those people” sounding like “at that place” means to put THEIR there, right at 27A.
28A: There is a reversal here, for a short word (“red,” meaning “Carmine”); it looks a bit tricky because there are a couple of places to run those letters back. You’ll see what I mean — take “wrong” to be “erring” and then run “red” back to get DERRINGER, a variety of “pistol.” I find myself hovering over details like those two “ER” appearances and confusing myself sometimes.
29A: Here’s a definition right up my alley, as opposed to those church and Belgian city references. Fortunately, this is also a straight anagram — “entailed” “changes,” or mixes up, to form DATELINE, the “start of a news story” that indicates that the reporter of that story is at the scene of the news, or at least close to it.
30A: I might be missing something here, but this is a gotcha. “A person who rents” (or leases, or “lets” is a LETTER, especially in Britain. So is, “for example,” the LETTER “a.” Got it?
1D: This is a convoluted clue; there’s a container and a charade, I guess you’d call it, and it’s also hard to deduce “HES” from men. That’s the outside of the container; the inside is OM, the most common mantra. Then the second part of the charade is PUN, for “wordplay.” The end result is HOMESPUN, a complicated way to get another word for “simple.”
2D: This clue is another of the (infrequent) easy pickings, if you know how to decode one important word — “leaders” means pick the first letter of some given words. So look at “many African nations investigating corruption” to simply get MANIC, for “agitated.”
3D: You might say “easy, again” here, but I was stymied. “Said aloud” indicated something homonym-ish, but the discord between a hawk and “something ugly” didn’t suggest anything, given that hawks are graceful, soaring … Oh. A hawk would say, “I soar;” this begets EYESORE.
5D: Here’s another container — take EVE, for evening or “latter part of the day,” and insert AD, for “commercial.” EVADE is another word for “Dodge.”
6D: Another container (“Interrupting” is the indicator here), this one with an anagrammatic twist (“bad” is the tip-off to that). Think CO for “company” and rearrange the letters in “plays” inside of it to get CALYPSO.
7D: Aha! Another gotcha — this one looks like a container, because of the use of “about.” Very tricky. Instead, “Rave about” means to throw those letters (R-A-V-E) about, I guess. They anagram to AVER, and then go above a synonym for “old” — AGING — to get AVERAGING, a “statistical procedure.” Word to the wise: If you follow the “rules” in a cryptic and remain lost, sometimes you have to tweak things a little bit.
8D: On the other hand, rules aren’t always meant to be broken. If you follow them here you’re good. Find a word for journey — how about TREK? — and wrap it around the outskirts of Baltimore, the ends of that word, to get TREBEK. Who’s watching “The Greatest of All Time?”
10D: I think this is our first reversal of the day; it’s small but mighty challenging, I think. If you automatically think of BO when you see “Derek,” you’re good. If you think of Jeter or (heaven forbid) Hough, Lam, or some other name that my Google just auto-filled, you’re going to have a problem. Take the letters BO and reverse them (“returning); then come up with a tennis shot to get another word for “Get a look at.” OBSERVE, right?
15D: This is another gotcha — the trick is to make yourself think of “Will” as a noun. “Perform an experiment,” then, is TEST; “roughly ten a.m.” becomes A-M-E-N-T, and you’ve got a simple go-along, TESTAMENT.
17D: A similarly hard-to-parse phrase, like the clue above: “One who calls it” made me think “ref” (for referee) or “ump” (umpire) — someone making a call. I’m sort of right. The “inside” tips us off to a container, though. A “sunshade,” or VISOR, holds that “it” to make “one who calls,” a VISITOR.
18D: You may have absorbed this by now — cryptic crossword entries tend to be common words, uncommonly clued. It’s easy to get thrown when a funny term crops up, one that doesn’t come to mind easily — this was the case here, for me. This is a tricky double definition: A doctor is a PRO CURER, as is “One who gets things” (a PROCURER). Using a definition for “doctor” as a noun, instead of interpreting that word as an active indicator to anagram some of the clue, is also counterintuitive.
20D: This is another clue where you need to decide whether a word is a verb or a noun, in this case “Pass.” There are also some really classic mid-difficulty elements to this clue. Take “after a while,” and think LATER; take “nearly everyone,” and think AL — which is nearly every letter in “all,” or everyone. That gets you LATERAL, a sideways pass of a ball in sports.
21D: Gardener solvers might have clicked on this one right away, or found themselves strolling the rose-strewn path thinking of trellises, pergolas, tuteurs and so on. The entry is in this category. It also has a playful relation to the previous down entry, if you happen to be solving strictly in clue order. For “jerk” you need to be kind and think of a little spasm or TIC, rather than a hideous person (I know, it’s tough to recalibrate in these trying times). That TIC “breaks into” a word for “new” that I just hinted at: LATE, as in, “that jerk has been really awful of late.” Put the TIC in the right spot and you’ll get a LATTICE.
For anyone who’s reading this and thinking “how am I ever going to figure out how to solve these puzzles on my own,” I myself would like nothing more than to be able to nonchalantly turn plywood into lattice, so it goes to show you that the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence.
22D: Strictly speaking, this is another double definition, but there’s a wrinkle in there that caught me by surprise. “Many a Disney movie” is G-RATED. Much like cheese, nerves can be GRATED — how “annoying”!
24D: There are three elements to this charade, even though the entry is only five letters. Without that constraint, it would be highly reasonable to interpret this clue as an anagram because of “party — it’s a gas” but there are too many letters to rearrange there. Instead, there’s “nurse” — think RN — “hosting,” or inviting in, “first-rate party.” Sometimes terms like “first-rate” or “top notch” indicate the letter A, as in a letter grade; so in this case, “first-rate party” is a very tricky way of cluing ADO. We often see this little bit of fill clued as a commotion, as in the Shakespearean sense, so this is original. The combined effect is RADON, that gas you’re looking for.
25D: Finally, a charade that’s simple, but only in retrospect (not like this puzzle as a whole, which was a good toughie). “Close” is NIGH; on “time,” reduce that word to the T. “After sundown,” then, is NIGHT. Good NIGHT, I say! I hope everyone’s satisfied with themselves for finishing a difficult cryptic.
What did you think?