Battle Lines Quickly Form Over Radical Property Tax Proposal
On a stretch of 11th Street in Park Slope, Brooklyn, two houses — one a modest two-family, and the other a three-bedroom clapboard home — could be Exhibits A and B in why New York City is now considering a sweeping proposal to overhaul its property tax system.
The homes are each worth roughly $1.75 million, but the combined property tax bill is slightly under $9,000 — far less than homes of comparable value in less gentrified parts of New York, like the Bronx or Staten Island.
Yet the owner of the houses, Mayor Bill de Blasio, said on Friday that he welcomed a chance to make the property tax system more equitable.
A few blocks away, Daniel Fountaine was more uncertain. He bought a two-bedroom apartment in a co-op building with views of Prospect Park in 1985 for only $175,000. As the price of his home soared, he became, at least on paper, a millionaire.
But Mr. Fountaine, an 84-year-old former accountant, is retired and on a fixed income. He said he can barely afford his annual $5,000 property tax bill — still far less than similarly priced homes in the suburbs, or even in Canarsie, Brooklyn, just six miles away — and cannot afford to pay significantly more.
“It’s too stressful to move,” he said on Friday. “What the hell are you going to do?”
All over the city, people had starkly different reactions to a high-level city commission’s recommendations, issued in preliminary form Thursday, to assess most homes, including co-ops and condominiums, at full market value — a seismic change that would shift the property tax burden to wealthier neighborhoods and lessen it for low- and moderate-income homeowners.
The proposal is far from a done deal, but Mr. de Blasio said on Friday that his goal was to get the changes approved by state and city lawmakers by the time he leaves office in a little under two years. While acknowledging that property taxes are an “extremely complex and emotional issue,” Mr. de Blasio insisted that the current system was unfair.
“The recommendations will lead to me paying more in property taxes, period,” he said in a radio interview, “and I believe that’s fair.”
It remains to be seen whether Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat who has suffered sagging approval ratings since returning from a failed presidential run, has the political capital to marshal backing for the plan, which could affect 90 percent of all homeowners in New York City.
On Friday, some lawmakers signaled support, though the plan was not immediately embraced by state leaders who said they were reviewing the details. A spokeswoman for Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said only that he would review the proposal.
Democratic leaders in the State Senate said the same thing, noting they were proud to have passed a statewide property tax cap last year to help homeowners. Kerri Biche, a spokeswoman for Carl E. Heastie, the Assembly speaker, said the plan was a “first step in the city coming up with a more fair and equitable property tax structure.”
The seeming reluctance to embrace such far-reaching changes to the property tax system is predictable, especially to those who have fought for years to change the system.
“The political powers that be see this as a third-rail issue,” said Martha Stark, policy director for Tax Equity Now NYC, a group that filed a 2017 lawsuit seeking to force the city to address the property tax inequities.
“We have no reason to believe this is going to actually translate into legislation to be adopted anytime soon, and especially not during this administration,” said Ms. Stark, a former city finance director under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
The city commission, which was created in 2018 by Mr. de Blasio and Corey Johnson, the City Council speaker, recommended eliminating the cap on how much a property’s assessed value can grow each year — a cap that helped keep taxes low, even as a property’s market value soared.
Elected officials who represent neighborhoods that could see higher taxes faced difficult decisions over whether to support the proposal.
Robert Jackson, a Democratic state senator who represents parts of the Upper West Side and Harlem, said he liked the plan, even if it hurts some of his constituents.
“I am concerned about anyone’s tax bills going up, but the bottom line is that New York City must have a system that is fair for everyone,” he said.
Councilman Joseph Borelli, a Republican from Staten Island, was less circumspect about voicing his support.
“Outer-borough homeowners, especially black and Latino homeowners, have been subsidizing woke progressives in posh neighborhoods and billionaires in high rises,” Mr. Borelli said. “If you buy a $3 million home, condo or mansion you should pay taxes on a $3 million home, condo or mansion. It shouldn’t matter whether you are in Mill Basin or Midtown.”
I. Daneek Miller, a councilman who represents Southeast Queens, where black residents have a high homeowner rate, said the property tax system made it difficult for black people to accumulate generational wealth.
“It’s about building wealth through homeownership,” he said. “If this proposal doesn’t come together, we won’t be able to hold on.”
The city commission has recommended two provisions for owners with lower incomes: a “partial homestead exemption" for owners below an unspecified income level, and a so-called circuit breaker that would limit tax bills to a certain percentage of household income.
Nonetheless, some homeowners feared that the changes would alter the neighborhood. Mark Chalfin bought a three-story brownstone near Prospect Park for $125,000 in 1980. In the past two years, the brownstones on either side of his home sold for around $4 million each.
“This neighborhood was affordable,” said Mr. Chalfin, 69, a lawyer. “Teachers, social workers, retirees.”
Now his home has a market value of $4.63 million, but his property taxes have remained low, at about $12,000 a year, because of the cap placed on how much residential property taxes can increase every year. He said he could afford to pay more, but worried that it would make Park Slope further out of reach for people like his three children.
“That’s a disappointment,” he said.
Homeowners in the Morris Park section of the Bronx stood to benefit from the proposed changes; they typically pay an effective tax rate at least three or four times higher than in Park Slope or twice as much as the Upper West Side.
“If they’re well-to-do and have beautiful places and they’re not paying what we pay, it’s not fair,” said Roseann Deluccia, standing on the steps of her fenced two-story house that she hopes to sell within a year.
Her property taxes are $5,114 on a home with a market value of $584,000, according to city records.
She has lived alone since the death of her husband a year ago, and wants to move in with a daughter on Long Island. The high property taxes are a contributing factor in her desire to move.
“It’s not easy keeping a place,” she said.