12 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
DEADMAU5 at Avant Gardner (Feb. 6-9, 7:30 p.m.). Making electronic music inherently demands a baseline of technical savvy, but the Canadian producer and D.J. Joel Zimmerman takes the requirement further than most. In recent years, Zimmerman’s performances have often centered on a complex staging setup he calls the cube — a massive, rotating rig onto which he projects responsive visuals using an application he coded himself. The spectacle elevates the festival-friendly dance music he performs under the moniker Deadmau5. This weekend, Zimmerman wraps his Cube V3 tour with four back-to-back performances in Brooklyn. The first three nights have sold out, but tickets are available on the resale market.
347-987-3146, avant-gardner.com
OKAY KAYA at National Sawdust (Feb. 13, 8 p.m.). Seemingly allergic to lyrical clichés, this singer writes offbeat, often jarringly forthright songs about the complex contours of love, sexuality and mental illness. From 2018’s “IUD,” a quirky track about asking her partner to come with her to Planned Parenthood, to last month’s “Psych Ward,” which depicts her time at a mental health institution, this Norwegian-born Brooklynite mines personal experience in service of vivid stories, delivered in her languid, creamy alto. Kaya’s new album, “Watch This Liquid Pour Itself,” expands beyond the understated sonic palette of her debut with strains of disco pop and rock. At National Sawdust, Kaya will kick off a short tour in support of the album.
646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org
TOVE LO at Brooklyn Steel (Feb. 12-13, 8 p.m.). This Swedish pop singer belongs to a crop of party girl poets — including her past collaborators Charli XCX and Lorde — whose songs trace the pursuit of serenity amid the chaos of the dance floor. But compared to her peers, Lo has often presented more jagged edges, her liquor-soaked lyrics tinged with as much self-destruction as self-discovery. On Lo’s fourth album, released in September and titled “Sunshine Kitty,” the club remains her home base, but her approach to personal unrest is noticeably more probing and nuanced. In the coming week, Lo performs two consecutive shows at Brooklyn Steel; though both are sold out, the ticket resale market is well stocked.
888-929-7849, bowerypresents.com
RAPHAEL SAADIQ at Terminal 5 (Feb. 13, 8 p.m.). Relative to the scope of this polymath’s influence on popular music, his celebrity is undersized. Saadiq, who came up in the 1980s and ’90s as a member of the soul trio Tony! Toni! Toné!, has made behind-the-scenes contributions to some of the biggest R&B records of the past three decades, from D’Angelo’s “Lady” to Solange’s “Cranes in the Sky.” He’s also put out music under his own name, and though his solo output tapered off in the 2010s, Saadiq ended the decade strong with the August release of “Jimmy Lee,” an album about trauma and addiction named for his late brother. At Terminal 5, he’ll perform with support from the Chicago-based poet and singer Jamila Woods.
212-582-6600, terminal5nyc.com
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
TANYA TUCKER at the Town Hall (Feb. 7, 8 p.m.). Last year, this veteran country star told Rolling Stone that “comeback” was her “least favorite word.” Nonetheless, few artists could more rightfully claim it than Tucker, who just won her first-ever Grammy Awards, nearly 50 years after her first nomination for the song “Delta Dawn.” Though hits have peppered her long career, salacious press has often diverted attention from her musical prowess — an injustice that roused the Americana artist Brandi Carlile, one of Tucker’s greatest champions. Carlile co-wrote and produced Tucker’s latest album, “While I’m Livin’,” a collection that bolsters her legacy as a defining voice of outlaw country.
212-997-6661, thetownhall.org
YBN CORDAE at Elsewhere (Feb. 11, 8 p.m.). Six years after his YBN compatriots began sewing the seeds of their gaming and rap collective across Xbox Live, Cordae Dunston, who performs as YBN Cordae, has emerged as the crew’s eminent star. Last summer, the North Carolina native funneled the momentum of his 2018 breakout single — essentially, a J. Cole diss track — into a star-studded debut album, with verses contributed by the likes of Anderson .Paak and Chance the Rapper. Even without his clout-boosting guest list, Cordae’s deft delivery and lyricism, alternately thoughtful and boastful, are suited to impress.
elsewherebrooklyn.com
OLIVIA HORN
NATHALIE JOACHIM at National Sawdust (Feb. 10, 7 p.m.). A flutist, vocalist and composer with big creative ideas, Joachim blends mediums and genres on “Fanm d’Ayiti (Women of Haiti),” her debut album, as she investigates the historical female figures who helped shape her own sense of Haitian heritage. The record incorporates electronics and a string quartet, as well as her voice and flute playing. At this concert, Joachim will be accompanied by the Kaufman Music Center’s teenage new-music ensemble, Face the Music. The program will also include performances by the violist Trevor New and the double bassist Peter Askim.
646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org
ADAM O’FARRILL’S STRANGER DAYS at Seeds Brooklyn (Feb. 11, 8:30 p.m.). O’Farrill is the scion of musical royalty (his grandfather Chico was, and his father, Arturo, still is, a major Latin-jazz bandleader), but in the last few years he has thoroughly outrun their shadow. He has released two albums with his chordless quartet, Stranger Days, both head-turningly good distillations of his scrappy approach to contemporary jazz. O’Farrill appears here with a slightly modified version of the band: Xavier Del Castillo on tenor saxophone, Walter Stinson on bass and Zack O’Farrill on drums.
seedsbrooklyn.org
PARKS + BREWER + WEINRIB at the Jazz Gallery (Feb. 7-8, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Here are three of the finest practitioners of the kind of jazz that grows thick on the ground at the Gallery: adroit, harmonically buoyant, loaded with multiple ideas per moment. The pianist Aaron Parks and the bassist Matt Brewer are two of the most revered improvisers among the youngest generation of rising jazz musicians; the drummer Craig Weinrib, a few years their junior, is quietly moving into a similar position.
646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
MARC RIBOT at the Stone (Feb. 11-15, 8:30 p.m.). Ribot’s all-around aesthetic is one of raucous disruption — whether he’s clawing a distorted wail out of his guitar in a caustic rendition of a jazz standard, assembling a crew of musicians to record classic protest anthems, or participating directly in activism on behalf of 21st-century artists’ rights. In the coming week at the Stone he will perform in a different musical setting each night. Highlights will include his collaboration with a large ensemble of Haitian musicians on Tuesday night and his solo-guitar show on Thursday.
thestonenyc.com
BOBBY WATSON AND HORIZON at Dizzy’s Club (Feb. 12-13, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Since Watson’s extended stint in Art Blakey’s Jazz Messengers that began over 40 years ago, he has been known as one of the more dexterous and affecting alto saxophonists in straight-ahead jazz. Here he leads an all-star band, with the estimable drummer Victor Lewis as a special guest. The ensemble also includes the trumpeter Terell Stafford, the pianist Edward Simon and the bassist Carroll V. Dashiell.
212-258-9595, jazz.org/dizzys
VANGUARD JAZZ ORCHESTRA at the Village Vanguard (Feb. 11-16, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). When the Vanguard Jazz Orchestra plays a classic tune like “The Groove Merchant” or “Kids Are Pretty People,” it’s not really doing a cover. That’s because this 16-piece big band dates back 54 years, when it got its start as the Thad Jones/Mel Lewis Orchestra. Even if it does someday run out of steam, it will remain one of the immortal large ensembles in jazz history. The band still holds down its traditional Monday-night residency at the Vanguard, but once a year it takes over for a full week in recognition of the group’s anniversary. This year’s celebration begins on Tuesday.
212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO