Young Crash Victims Shared Kobe Bryant’s Passion for Basketball
Good morning.
(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)
On Monday, as more information emerged about the helicopter crash that killed nine people, including Kobe Bryant and his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, the sports world grappled with the sudden loss of a towering, complicated figure.
Here’s what to know:
While fans — particularly Latinos, who embraced Mr. Bryant as one of their own — continued to grieve for him and his daughter, families and friends began to mourn the seven other victims of the crash, my colleagues reported.
Among the victims were John Altobelli, the longtime coach of Orange Coast College’s baseball team; his wife, Keri; and their daughter, Alyssa, who was scheduled to play in a youth basketball tournament.
Sarah Chester and her daughter Payton, also a 13-year-old basketball player, were remembered as part of a loving Corona del Mar family, “full of mischief and laughter.”
Christina Mauser had coached Gianna Bryant at a Newport Beach school, before Mr. Bryant, who crowned her “Mother of Defense,” hired her to coach for a team at his Mamba Academy.
And the pilot, Ara Zobayan, of Huntington Beach, was remembered as a kind man and an experienced, capable aviator.
The helicopter involved in the crash had gotten special approval to fly in weather so foggy that a witness nearby said people were having trouble driving.
The pilot was both certified to fly under instrument conditions — meaning he could navigate even with low visibility — and certified to teach others. But if he had switched to instrument conditions, he would have had to land at an airport.
Mr. Bryant’s death led to difficult discussions over how to understand the legacy of a man who was accused of sexual assault, but also was a fiercely loved hero to many.
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
Looking to catch up on the international outbreak? Here’s what you need to know. [The New York Times]
We asked you to share any favorite memories of watching Kobe Bryant play basketball, or any encounters off the court.
We got lots of responses: A grandfather stood next to him as they both waited for their families at the end of “Mr. Toad’s Wild Ride”; a fellow parishioner at Our Lady Queen of Angels in Newport Beach asked for prayers.
But one story stood out. It came from Celeste Perez, who was 9 years old in 1996, when Mr. Bryant was signed by the Lakers.
Ms. Perez wrote that her Filipino-American family had followed the draft closely that year, and they were surprised when they seemed to be the only ones who recognized Mr. Bryant, hanging out by himself at Universal CityWalk, a short time after he arrived.
“Wearing an all-white ensemble and a beret to top it off, Kobe looked like a lost member of Boyz II Men,” she wrote.
The big group sent its most basketball-savvy cousin to congratulate Mr. Bryant, whose face, Ms. Perez recalled, lit up. He motioned for the rest to come over, too.
In lieu of a photo or an autograph (the family had run out of film and didn’t have paper handy) and “in true Filipino fashion,” she said, the family invited him to join them for dinner at Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. He politely declined.
But later, he tracked them down, bearing a postcard signed “Kobe Bryant #8.”
“I noticed he had other postcards that he’d practiced his autograph on,” Ms. Perez wrote. “We must have been among the first to ask him.”
Ms. Perez’s family promised to watch “every one of his games as a Laker.” They didn’t know they’d be watching for two decades.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.