The Last Operetta of the Weimar Republic Returns to Berlin
BERLIN — It was an evening in late January 1933, not long before Hitler was sworn in as the German chancellor, when Jaromir Weinberger’s operetta “Frühlingsstürme” (“Spring Storms”) had its premiere.
The coming political turmoil was not lost on the show’s predominantly Jewish creators, who wrote jokes that winkingly alluded to the Brown Shirts, the Nazi storm troopers, even as they carried torches down the street nearby.
People in the audience must have loved what they saw; they cheered on the operetta’s star, Richard Tauber, through several encores of his big aria. Shellac recordings spread the score’s hits, sung by Tauber and the soprano Jarmila Novotna.
But “Frühlingsstürme” was open for only 10 days before Hitler took power, effectively ending the Weimar Republic — the brief but troubled period of German history that also brought about a golden age of artistic and sexual liberation, even onstage in Berlin’s operettas.
Soon after, Tauber left Germany. (During performances, it is said, Hitler Youth would heckle him from the balcony.) Weinberger left, too, eventually settling in the United States, where his life later ended in suicide. “Frühlingsstürme,” the last operetta of the Weimar Republic, would disappear from Berlin for more than 80 years — until Saturday, when a new, reconstructed production by Barrie Kosky premiered at the Komische Oper here.
Operetta — a form that evolved from the bawdy shows of Offenbach’s Paris to turn-of-the-century Vienna and Weimar Berlin — has had something of a renaissance in recent years, with Mr. Kosky as its patron saint. His rediscoveries of works by composers like Paul Abraham and Emmerich Kalman, and now Weinberger, will go down as the defining project of his tenure at the Komische Oper, where he has been the artistic director since 2012.
In an interview, Mr. Kosky was insistent on referring to operettas of the Weimar era as a specifically German art form — not Jewish (though they were produced, written and performed almost entirely by Jewish artists) or even German-Jewish.
“These pieces,” he said, “should be as much a part of German culture as ‘St. Matthew Passion.’”
Operettas that premiered in Berlin during the 1920s and early ’30s were a departure from their Viennese predecessors: more urban, more influenced by American jazz. They were subversive politically, sexually and racially. They were also a commercial art form, much like Broadway.
But under Nazi rule, theater became subsidized — and regulated. Many of the artists who thrived in Weimar Berlin simply left. Some would go on to revolutionize midcentury American culture; others failed to ever regain their footing. In Germany, though, operetta remained only as a soulless shadow of itself.
“Afterward it got boring,” said Ulrich Lenz, the Komische Oper’s dramaturge, “and then came morality, which is really strange.”
For example, in Abraham’s “Ball im Savoy” — one of the most beloved operettas in the Komische Oper’s repertoire — a wife decides that since her husband betrayed her, she is free to do the same to him. Later in the 1930s, plots like this were banned, in favor of depictions of more “ideal” German couples.
When operettas enjoyed a resurgence after World War II, they were desexualized, sunny and hardly subversive. And singers approached the music like it was lyric opera.
“It wasn’t bad enough that the Nazis erased this, but they also Aryanized the music in the ’50s,” Mr. Kosky said. “It’s like if Anna Netrebko sang Poppea. If your voice is not a Baroque voice, why would you do that?”
Some music from the Weimar era was lost; for a long time, it was thought that Weinberger’s full score for “Frühlingsstürme” had been destroyed in World War II. But, as Mr. Lenz and other researchers found, it couldn’t have been: There was a Czech performance and broadcast in 1947.
So, when Mr. Kosky and his team decided to mount a production for the Komische Oper — working at that point from nothing more than old recordings and a piano-vocal score — they turned to the broadcaster to see whether the orchestral parts existed somewhere in its archive. But nothing turned up.
The Komische Oper eventually commissioned a re-orchestration, by Norbert Biermann. It’s always a tricky art, but even more so in the case of “Frühlingsstürme”: The piano-vocal score had instrumental cues, and extant recordings offered only some suggestions.
Weinberger’s previous scores weren’t necessarily helpful, either. He is best known for the opera “Schwanda the Bagpiper,” whose music doesn’t bear much resemblance to the almost postgenre eclecticism of “Frühlingsstürme” — in which you might hear echoes of Smetana, Strauss and jazz all within the same aria, the whole deftly navigated on Saturday by the conductor Jordan de Souza.
The story, too, mixes moods: It’s an espionage thriller set during the Russo-Japanese War, yet there are elements of romantic comedy and show-tune spectacle. (And, because this is operetta, war won’t stop a wealthy widow from throwing a ball.) Unlike most other shows of the time, its ending is more bittersweet than tidy and joyous.
I’m not sure whether, on balance, this makes for an entirely successful show. After all, being the last operetta of the Weimar Republic doesn’t make “Frühlingsstürme” inherently good; it just confers on it the unhappy honor of having opened just days before the Nazis took hold.
It is, though, an invaluable addition to the Komische Oper’s repertoire, especially as the company’s first Weinberger work. (“Schwanda” is coming later this season.)
Mr. Kosky begins his staging with a large wooden crate that opens to the bright, jubilant melodies of the overture, as if the box had contained “Frühlingsstürme” for nearly 90 years and was once again revealing it to Berlin.
Over the early scenes, whose tones range from noir to slapstick, the principal characters are introduced: General Wladimir Katschalow, a largely comical speaking role performed by Stefan Kurt; his daughter, Tatjana (Alma Sadé, infectiously exuberant); her love interest, the often-undercover journalist Roderich (Dominik Köninger); the ball-hosting widow, Lydia Pawlowska (Vera-Lotte Boecker, a tireless soprano); and the Japanese officer Ito (Tansel Akzeybek, bringing a honeyed timbre to Tauber’s role).
There are racial pitfalls baked into the libretto, as well as vaguely Asian melodies in the score, and Mr. Kosky manages them with mixed success. You may find yourself flinching at the sight of chorus dancers in Turandot-style headdresses, but the casting of Mr. Akzeybek slyly makes Ito’s outsider status more relevant for Berlin today. He is a German singer of Turkish descent; and Turkish immigrants have a fraught history in this country.
Most of the songs — oddly, some stop time while others propel the drama forward — are reserved for the couples. Tatjana and Roderich’s bubbly duets are rich with physical comedy; Lydia and Ito are given lyrical lines that verge on opera. The most famous number has always been Ito’s “Du wärst für mich die Frau gewesen” (recorded even by Jonas Kaufmann). It’s deservedly an earworm, lightly soaring and believably felt in Mr. Akzeybek’s performance.
The tune comes back, naturally, at the end: Ito sings a bit of it wistfully as he exits the stage, leaving behind only the wooden crate, sealed and softly lit. Let’s hope it doesn’t have to stay closed again for too long.