She Found Carson McCullers’s Love Letters. They Taught Her Something About Herself.
MY AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF CARSON McCULLERS
By Jenn Shapland
In Carson McCullers’s 1946 novel “The Member of the Wedding,” 12-year-old Frankie Addams, a motherless girl growing up in small-town Georgia, is jolted by news of her older brother’s engagement. Hoping to join his wedding as something a great deal more than a spectator or bridesmaid, she plans to accompany the bride and groom on their honeymoon.
McCullers’s third and best-known novel tends to be misremembered as a sweeter affair than it is. A lonely misfit in shorts and a sombrero, precocious yet naïve, Frankie is grappling with a self she doesn’t quite know and longings she can’t name. She spends her days largely alone, shunned by other girls, but at the circus she avoids “the Freaks, for it seemed to her that they had looked at her in a secret way.” Part of the novel’s emotional undertow is the sense that Frankie’s isolation, her desire to belong — to someone, to someplace — is unlikely to end with adolescence. “I suppose this book is my autobiography,” McCullers wrote to a lover after she completed it.
Outsiderness was McCullers’s great theme, one that’s inextricable from the quest for identity and self-definition, and while none of her protagonists were out of the closet, it’s hard to read her work now and not see queerness as a central part. It was her identification with people ill at ease in themselves that made them so relatable to so many. It is also what led some critics to write that McCullers was “before her time,” that most banal and patronizing of descriptors.
In fact, she was very much of her time, often painfully so. As Jenn Shapland recounts in her rousing and tautly written new book, “My Autobiography of Carson McCullers,” McCullers struggled with the novel for years trying to understand Frankie. It was surely a similar craving for socially sanctioned love that drove McCullers to marry — disastrously, twice — the same troubled man, Reeves McCullers. Only in the last decade of the author’s life (she died at 50), when she began therapy and fell in love with her psychologist, Mary Mercer, was she able to call herself a lesbian.
Shapland’s nonfiction debut isn’t a biography of McCullers, with whom she feels a powerful kinship, though it fills in key absences in the record left by McCullers’s biographers, who downplayed her affairs with women. It is, instead, a hard-won inquiry into how we seek out the truth of ourselves and others in ways that often, by necessity, aren’t straightforward, that arrive in our lives in glimmering bits and shards. Shapland’s quest is echoed in the book’s form: Short chapters detailing her search for clues to McCullers’s relationships with women mix with meditations on her own struggle for self-knowledge — the very scaffolding that literary history, and to some extent, our selves, depends on.
Shapland was an intern at the Harry Ransom Center, a writers’ and artists’ archive at the University of Texas at Austin, when she discovered love letters written to McCullers from Annemarie Clarac-Schwarzenbach, a Swiss heiress with whom McCullers had an affair. Within a week of discovering the letters, Shapland cut her hair short; within a year, she was calling herself a lesbian “more or less comfortably.” A chronicle of literary possession ensues: At the Ransom Center, Shapland cataloged McCullers’s kimonos and vibrantly hued coats; on a monthlong writing residency, she lived in McCullers’s childhood home in Columbus, Ga., bathing in her tub and making biscuits in her kitchen. For a brief period in her 20s, Shapland took to wearing a silk robe with magenta polka dots over her clothes. Asking herself, “What would Carson do?,” she drank half a bottle of bourbon on the first night of another residency and spent the next day in fetal position.
Obsession can feel a lot like coming of age — exhilarating, a little awkward, even, at times, absurd. McCullers, too, seemed always to be seeking a kind of confirmation of self or mentorship in older women she admired. In 1958, when Richard Avedon took her picture, she told him, “I just want to look like Greta Garbo.” During one of her stays at Yaddo, the writers’ colony, legend has it that McCullers lay at the threshold of Katherine Anne Porter’s room, waiting for the older, established writer to emerge at dinnertime. (When she finally did, Porter simply stepped over McCullers’s prone body.)
In matters of self-presentation, McCullers — a literary it girl from the time she published her first novel, “The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter,” at 23 — was on point. Fashion was a more coded form of expression: McCullers’s embroidered vests and bluejeans spoke the things she couldn’t say aloud. Even after she was too ill to wear much more than nightgowns — a bout of rheumatic fever damaged her heart, leading to a series of strokes that left her partially paralyzed — she had them specially made by a French seamstress.
The difficulty in overcoming this instinct to code and conceal is what gives Shapland’s book its considerable stakes. In an early, quietly drawn scene, she recalls the time she brought her girlfriend — officially, her freshman roommate — home from college to visit her family. Over dinner, her mother confronted them about their relationship, giving a dramatic reading of tender passages she found while snooping in Shapland’s notebooks.
After this episode, Shapland stopped writing for years. But just as dehumanizing as being forcibly outed is being written out of the story entirely. In a mini-chapter titled “Euphemisms,” Shapland lists the ways biographers referred to McCullers’s lovers as “traveling companions,” “special friends” and so on. “I took it personally,” Shapland writes. “I began to feel unreal, deranged. If Carson was not a lesbian, if none of these women were lesbians, according to history, if indeed there hardly is a lesbian history, do I exist?” To be perpetually unnamed, to be constantly having to read between the lines of a straight narrative — to be subtext and never text — points to a pernicious cultural hegemony: the assumption that girls will relate to male heroes and that queer readers will imagine themselves into heterosexual love stories. It’s as if art’s ability to induce empathy runs only one way, when of course empathy is, as Shapland so simply and beautifully puts it, “a choice a person makes, moment to moment, in how they approach other people. On the page and off.”
Is traditional literary biography equipped to address its own historical bias? Shapland is skeptical. “Biographers broke into the house and rearranged the furniture to their liking,” she writes, objecting to the kind of facile-seeming connections made by literary scholars between an author’s life and her writing. Shapland’s book is the kind of state-of-the-form reckoning that makes one wish there were more like it. The truth is, doing the work of retrospective, corrective rearranging (pretty much the job description of any critic or academic working today) is never without risk. Surely, the more transparently we acknowledge the stakes, the more likely we are to arrive at a payoff. After all, it’s often by looking back that we move the conversation forward, and by inhabiting the lives of others that we might glimpse pieces of our own.