Review: Bess Myerson’s ‘Ugly Daughter’ Recalls Miss America Dearest
When she was hired to write a film for Barbra Streisand, a few decades ago, Barra Grant thought she’d made it. Her mother, on the other hand, was nonchalantly dismissive: “I’m glad she’s such an important Jew now,” she said of Streisand. “Takes some of the pressure off me.”
In a couple of sentences, we learn that Grant’s mother, Bess Myerson, enjoyed some kind of celebrity, and that she was a narcissist and an underminer.
At least that is Grant’s perspective in her frustrating autobiographical solo play, “Miss America’s Ugly Daughter: Bess Myerson and Me.”
In the show, which is directed by Eve Brandstein, Grant recalls how hard it was being the child of the only Jewish woman to win the Miss America contest. “No matter what I did, I could never I could never measure up,” she says, “and so in my own mind I remained Miss America’s schlubby, chubby, ugly daughter.”
When we first meet Grant, she’s getting a call from her insomniac mother at 2 in the morning. Myerson is 70 at that point, so we are in the early 1990s, and she has about 20 years to live.
It does not take long to realize that the nighttime conversation is part of a familiar, hellish pattern for the pair. Myerson calls her daughter to kvetch and berate, but also unwittingly express a desperate need for company, if only on the phone. (Anna Holbrook portrays the disembodied Myerson and remains unseen until the curtain call).
It is easy now to snicker at that earlier quip about the burden of being a Jewish star, but Myerson was, indeed, very famous. She was crowned in 1945 and gained instant recognition, but still faced anti-Semitism — regular pageant sponsors, for instance, were not interested in being associated with her. She went on to an illustrious career on television game shows, and as a consultant and a public servant: She was appointed head of New York City’s Department of Consumer Affairs in 1969 and was an adviser to three presidents.
Yet younger New Yorkers are unlikely to be aware of Myerson, let alone of her accomplishments, and the play does not help, focusing almost exclusively on the mother-daughter relationship; Grant did more to put her Myerson’s career in perspective in a December opinion column in The New York Times.
Then again, this is not docu-theater, but an exorcism, because it’s obvious that for years, if not decades, Myerson crushed her daughter’s self-esteem — although Grant did go on to become an actress, screenwriter and director (“Love Hurts,” “Life of the Party”).
Stripped of her public life, the older woman comes across as a miserly, half-delusional mommie dearest with kleptomaniac tendencies and bad taste in men. Both are true, mind you: Myerson was accused of shoplifting, and an affair with a Mafioso left her embroiled in a bribery scandal.
Grant milks this for all it’s worth — can you blame a writer? — and choice details abound, like that time Myerson offered a purloined airline blanket as a bar mitzvah present, or when she gave the young Barra an autograph book in which she’d signed almost all the pages herself. The dialogue often has a dark wit, as if penned by a meaner version of Nora Ephron.
And yet we keep drifting back to the same issue: Grant’s portrait is etched with a startling mixture of love and anger, but it also feels half-finished.