Isabel Allende Sings the Praises of Process, Peace and Pups
WORD WHISPERER Isabel Allende isn’t sure how many books she’s written: “I think I have like 23 or 24. I haven’t counted them, but I can find out and let you know.” Her message is clear, in a gentle and polite way: The statistics are not the point. The stories are.
In fact, Allende has published 24 books, including memoirs, stories and fantasy fiction for young adults. Her 20th novel, “A Long Petal of the Sea” — which lands on this week’s hardcover fiction list at No. 8 — is inspired by the experiences of the half million refugees who left Spain after the 1930s civil war only to be imprisoned in France.
“Beaches were closed with barbed wire and people were shoved into these camps with no water, no shelter, no food. Sometimes I struggle with a book but I didn’t struggle with this one,” Allende says. “This was 1939, so there’s documentation — photography, movies and novels.” One character was inspired by a friend she met in Venezuela in 1975, who escaped on the Winnipeg, a cargo ship that transported more than 2,000 people to Chile at the behest of the diplomat and poet Pablo Neruda.
Allende always begins new books on Jan. 8, the anniversary of the day in 1981 when she started writing a letter to her grandfather that turned into her first novel, “The House of Spirits.” She gets up to work at 5:30 a.m., when her husband goes to the gym, and continues for around 10 hours with only occasional breaks to walk her rescue mutts, Dulce and Perla.
She says, “Silence, solitude and time. That’s what I need.”
Occasionally, Allende will write nonfiction in English, but she drafts fiction only in Spanish: “Because for me, fiction happens in the belly. I write by instinct and those things happen in Spanish — like praying, counting, making love.”
Allende says she prefers writing a book to talking about one, but then she tells story after story of people she’s crossed paths with during the first week of her book tour. There’s the reader who kept the card Allende sent 20 years ago; the man whose daughter’s life was saved after a doctor’s assistant recognized symptoms of porphyria he’d read about in Allende’s memoir “Paula”; and, finally, the blind woman in Tampa, Fla., who stepped up to the microphone and said, “I’ve been listening to your books for years and years and it’s like I’m seeing in color.”
Allende says, “There were tears in the audience. That connection is really moving.”