Man Charged With Throwing Lit Incendiary Device at Planned Parenthood
The authorities have charged an 18-year-old accused of lighting an incendiary device and throwing it at a Planned Parenthood building in Delaware.
The teenager, Samuel James Gulick, of Middletown, Del., was charged on Monday with three counts: maliciously damaging a building used in interstate commerce through the use of fire or destructive device; intentionally damaging a facility that provides reproductive health services; and possession of an unregistered destructive device under the National Firearms Act, according to a news release from the United States Attorney’s Office for the District of Delaware.
About 2:16 a.m. on Friday, Mr. Gulick drove to a Planned Parenthood building in Newark, Del., according to court documents.
Video surveillance recorded Mr. Gulick standing on the porch of the building and spray-painting in red letters the Crusader slogan “Deus vult” (God wills it).
Mr. Gulick then stepped off the porch, lit an object and tossed it at the front window of the building, the court documents said. The two-story building, which was closed at the time, has a clinic and educational programs, Ruth Lytle-Barnaby, chief executive of Planned Parenthood of Delaware, said Tuesday.
The device, which appeared to be a Molotov cocktail, exploded and sparked a fire before it self-extinguished, according to the criminal complaint.
Through nearby surveillance cameras, the authorities said they were able to identify the vehicle, a Toyota Highlander, that Mr. Gulick used to flee the scene. The investigators also said they identified him through Instagram posts in which he made anti-abortion remarks and used the phrase “Deus vult.”
The F.B.I. said it arrested Mr. Gulick on Saturday. He is being held in federal custody and has a detention hearing scheduled on Friday, Kimberlynn Reeves, a spokeswoman for the United States Attorney’s Office for the District of Delaware, said Tuesday.
Edson A. Bostic, the federal public defender for the District of Delaware, said on Tuesday that his office would not be making a statement at this time.
Ms. Lytle-Barnaby said her staff was unfamiliar with Mr. Gulick.
“This is an act of domestic terrorism and a blatant attack on reproductive health,” she said. “Unfortunately, I feel like we are in a time and an administration that emboldens people to do things and this is one of the kinds of things that has been happening around the country.”
Mr. Gulick faces five to 20 years in prison and a $250,000 fine if he is convicted of the most serious offense, which is maliciously damaging the facility, according to the United States Attorney’s Office.