A 500-Story Tower Has Collapsed. Can Humanity Be Rescued From the Rubble?
THE HEAP
By Sean Adams
“The Heap” is about a pile of trash that used to be a tower. There is easy symbolism to be had in the contrast between these two states — soaring aspiration pitted against the remains of demolished ambition — but the author Sean Adams is thankfully less interested in allegory than in harnessing its strange contrasts to create cutting satire. And while there is a thematic anxiety, in this debut, about voice and speech that alludes to the story of the Tower of Babel (characters threaten to remove one another’s vocal cords, a tongue is amputated), the forces in play are decidedly earthly.
The tower in question is Los Verticalés, a 500-floor “marvel of modern architecture” that has, for reasons unclear, collapsed, leaving 20 acres of rubble mounded in the American desert. (The novel reimagines our own 21st-century timeline as one in which 9/11 never occurred, allowing Adams to sidestep his disaster’s darkest antecedent.) A cleanup effort has been organized by Peter Thisbee, an Elon Musk/Jeff Bezos type who was the architect of the ruined skyscraper. Thisbee offers volunteers a “fully weatherized camper, a rehabilitated bicycle and a small living stipend.” This isn’t much motivation to undertake the immense, unpleasant work involved, but Thisbee has another card to play: The Dig Effort is also a rescue operation. Buried deep inside the Heap is a lone survivor.
Bernard Anders, a Los Verticalés radio D.J., not only lived through the collapse, but is able to continue broadcasting from the ruined studio where he has been entombed. He hosts a nightly call-in show, answering questions about everything from the way he sustains his existence (he eats rats, and drinks water from a “trickle running down the wall”) to how highly he ranks his current “state of happiness” (even buried alive, he manages a four out of 10). His show is an improbable hit, as listeners around the world tune in to follow “the mundane details of Bernard’s strange subterranean existence.”
The show’s most popular segments are conversations between Bernard and his brother, Orville, who calls in each night after working long hours on the Dig. Framed as a story of “two brothers, struggling to connect through layers of earth,” their talks have such high ratings that the station’s parent company, Sundial Media, wants to monetize them. They offer Orville a generous sum in exchange for weaving advertisements into the flow of his fraternal heart-to-hearts. When Orville refuses on principle, he finds that not only has Sundial contrived to prevent him from making his nightly call-in, they have replaced him with a voice actor, and no one, not even Bernard, is the wiser.
It is to Adams’s credit that he establishes this lengthy premise with brisk efficiency. And Orville’s attempts to thwart Sundial’s scheme form a compelling narrative, with unexpected twists and darkly comic turns. Weighing it down, however, are Adams’s efforts to fill out the novel’s world. Los Verticalés (known by residents as “the Vert”) would have been an interesting enough setting for its own book, and Adams hints at this by splicing into the narrative details of pre-collapse life in the form of a collective memoir called “The Later Years.” Written by residents fortunate enough to have been away during the tower’s destruction, “The Later Years” offers fascinating glimpses into an increasingly insular and bizarre community. We witness the etiquette of hallways and elevators, the manipulation of local traffic by adjusting the time zones of individual residents, the political struggles between the inner (lower-class) and outer (upper-class) units, and a parking garage that, because no one ever leaves, doubles as a red-light district. It’s engaging material, but the decision to interweave it throughout the present narrative slows down the plot without heightening suspense.
Yet learning about Vert culture is essential for understanding “The Heap,” because what Adams is after is a kind of exploration of communal life. Despite their seclusion, the skyscraper’s residents did not devolve into the anarchic violence of J. G. Ballard’s masterpiece “High Rise.” Instead they allowed the particulars of their unusual existence to subsume their identity. This is why they cannot move on, why they came together to write a grimly nostalgic memoir. Gradually we come to see that the same is true for the community working on the Dig Effort. They have developed insider slang (their nightspot is “The Bars”; their administrative sector “The Ass”; their own community “CamperTown”), and departures are so rare they can be tracked in a printed log. While it’s true that they are essentially dupes, lured by the noble ruse of rescuing Bernard into cleaning up a billionaire’s mess, Adams avoids passing judgment. Humans have bonded over sillier stuff than this. We live in an age where like-minded communities are a given, where individuals use their love for a movie franchise or a pop singer to define themselves, how they ought to exist in the world. The novel’s concern is not the instinct to form groups, but what people do within them. Its characters — Orville and his friends, as well as the villains arrayed against them — suffer because of their idiosyncratic flaws and choices. They manipulate, scheme and consolidate power. But they also care, love and sacrifice. The suggestion is of a lingering quality to human nature. Whether clustered in a vertical utopia or scavenging its collapse, people, for better or for worse — and in “The Heap” it is frequently the latter — will always act like people.