Weinstein Trial: ‘I’m Being Raped,’ Recalls ‘Project Runway’ Assistant
It started after they went to his apartment. There, she told a jury, alone with him in his Manhattan loft, her boss, Harvey Weinstein, lunged at her on a sofa.
They got into a tug-of-war, she said — he was pulling at her and she was trying to push him away. It ended in the bedroom where, she added, she attempted to deflect him by anxiously announcing that she was on her period.
But that did not deter him, Miriam Haley testified on Monday at Mr. Weinstein’s rape trial. Instead, she said, he pushed her onto a bed, held her down and forcibly performed oral sex on her.
“I’m being raped,” Ms. Haley recalled thinking. She added, “I was in so much shock at the time that I just checked out.”
In recounting the alleged assault in July 2006, Ms. Haley became the second accuser to take the stand against Mr. Weinstein at the trial in Lower Manhattan. She recently legally changed her name from Mimi Haleyi.
Last week, the actress Annabella Sciorra, best known for her role in “The Sopranos,” told the jury that the producer shoved his way into her own apartment in New York and raped her in the winter months of either 1993 or 1994.
In all, six women are testifying against Mr. Weinstein at the trial, which is widely seen as a watershed moment in the #MeToo movement. Mr. Weinstein has not been charged with raping Ms. Haley, but instead faces counts of criminal sexual act and predatory sexual assault.
He is accused of a total of five felony counts, including rape and predatory sexual assault, for his alleged behavior toward Ms. Haley and another woman, Jessica Mann, in 2013. He could get life in prison if convicted of the last charge.
The trial has delved into the thorny issues of consent and sexual dynamics in the film industry. Prosecutors have described how Mr. Weinstein, 67, used his power and imposing physicality to coerce women into sexual encounters.
The criminal charges are based solely on allegations from Ms. Haley and Ms. Mann. Ms. Sciorra’s account, prosecutors hope, will support the predatory sexual assault charge. The judge is allowing the other women to testify to establish a pattern of behavior, even though most of their allegations are too old to prosecute.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers maintain that the producer’s relationships with Ms. Haley, now 42, and the other women were consensual. The lawyers said she continued to see Mr. Weinstein long after the alleged attack and had bragged to her friends about her friendship with him.
“The truth is you had a consensual relationship with Mr. Weinstein,” a defense lawyer, Damon Cheronis, said, pressing Ms. Haley on cross-examination. “Not a consensual sexual relationship, no,” she replied.
On the witness stand on Monday, Ms. Haley testified that after the alleged assault, she began using the last name Haley to avoid being easily found on Google.
She first met Mr. Weinstein, she said, at a movie premiere in London in 2004. She was a young production assistant at the time who had been raised in Sweden. Mr. Weinstein was a Hollywood producer who had reshaped the independent film industry with Oscar-winning films like “Shakespeare in Love” and “Pulp Fiction.”
Two years later, Ms. Haley found herself in need of a new job. She ran into Mr. Weinstein at the Cannes Film Festival in France, she said, and asked him if there were any opportunities at the Weinstein Company, his production firm in New York.
They met at the Majestic Hotel in Cannes, Ms. Haley said, where Mr. Weinstein suggested that she could help on one of his new ventures, the reality-television show “Project Runway.” From the start, she testified, the producer tried to sexualize what she believed was a professional relationship. He made remarks about her legs, she said, and asked her to give him a massage.
“I had been so excited to go and see him, and then he had treated me that way,” Ms. Haley said. Leaving the hotel, she recalled, she felt “humiliated” and broke into tears.
But even though she rejected Mr. Weinstein in France, Ms. Haley said, he ultimately got her a post at “Project Runway.” While she testified that he was sometimes “respectful, even charming” with her, she also said that his sexual advances continued.
Once, Ms. Haley said, Mr. Weinstein drove her to her apartment in the East Village and asked if he could come inside. When she told him no, he invited her to fly with him to Paris for a fashion show, she said.
Somewhat later, Ms. Haley testified, Mr. Weinstein showed up at her apartment, barged in and repeated his request that she travel with him to Paris. She refused, she said, telling him that she had heard he had “a terrible reputation with women.”
Ms. Haley said he then got “defensive and left.”
After all of this, however, Ms. Haley agreed to go with Mr. Weinstein to a film premiere in Los Angeles. She said she did so because she would be traveling alone and because one of her friends in California was about to give birth.
On July 11, 2006 — the day he paid for her ticket — Mr. Weinstein invited Ms. Haley to visit him at his apartment in Lower Manhattan. When she got there, she recalled, he offered her a drink and they sat on his sofa.
Then, she said, Mr. Weinstein lunged at her.
“I pushed him away, and he kept kissing and fondling me,” Ms. Haley told the jury. “I got up and tried to walk away, and he pulled me toward him.”
Mr. Weinstein backed her into a bedroom, she said, where she fell “backward onto the bed.” All the while, she testified, she was telling the producer: “I don’t want this to happen. I’m on my period.” She recounted seeing children’s drawings on the wall.
It was then, she told the jury, that Mr. Weinstein yanked the tampon from her body and put his mouth on her genitals. “I was telling him, ‘No, no, no, don’t do that,’” Ms. Haley said. “It was as if he didn’t believe me.”
Afterward, Ms. Haley said, she walked alone to her apartment. She never reported the assault to the police.
(Some observers in the courtroom on Monday heard Ms. Haley testify that she recalled thinking, “I was being raped” during the incident. Others heard her testimony as “I’m being raped.” The official court reporter later determined that she said, “I’m being raped.”)
Two weeks later, Ms. Haley said, Mr. Weinstein was “persistent” that she meet with him again, and she went to see him at the TriBeCa Grand Hotel. When she entered his room, she said, the producer pulled her toward the bed. Though she was sobbing, Ms. Haley said, she had sex with him.
Mr. Weinstein has not been charged in that encounter. Under cross-examination, Ms. Haley said she did not know it was an assault because she “didn’t physically resist.”
“I felt like an idiot and I felt numb,” she said.
Ms. Haley said she later tried to maintain “a professional connection” with Mr. Weinstein. She passed scripts to him from friends, she said, and once, while in London, she pitched him on her own idea for a project.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers have said that Ms. Haley and Mr. Weinstein had a consensual relationship for years. He gave her tickets to movie premieres, the lawyers said, and paid for her to fly to London shortly after the alleged second assault.
On cross-examination on Monday, Mr. Cheronis suggested that Ms. Haley was participating in the criminal case because she had intended to sue Mr. Weinstein. She denied the lawyer’s claim. Ms. Haley had held a news conference in October 2017 to announce her allegations against Mr. Weinstein, but Mr. Cheronis noted that she still had not reported it to the police.
Mr. Cheronis showed the jury emails Ms. Haley wrote to the producer that seemed to suggest an amicable relationship.
In an email from June 2008, Ms. Haley wrote: “Hi Harvey, how are you? Great to see you.” It ended with, “Lots of Love Miriam.”
In another email, from February 2009, Ms. Haley asked Mr. Weinstein if he had any “leads” on jobs, adding “my cat needs feeding.” This email ended with, “Hope you’re super well.”
Ms. Haley acknowledged on cross-examination that even after her second sexual encounter with Mr. Weinstein, she did not stop seeing him. In fact, as Mr. Cheronis noted, for three days after their meeting at the hotel in TriBeCa, she drew hearts in her planner.
Mr. Cheronis asked if that was reflective of her mood.
“It may have been,” she said.