For Democrats, Which Is the Road to Victory?
To the Editor:
Re “What Will It Take to Beat Donald Trump?,” by Bret Stephens (column, nytimes.com, Dec. 26):
It will take a Democratic ticket (currently, I like Biden-Abrams) that will not offend too many and that will cause independents, moderate Republicans of conscience, young people and people of color to turn out in large numbers.
It will take a unified effort by all Democrats to work together for the greater good of the country, no matter their first choice for the nomination.
It will take unparalleled contributions to and volunteer work for the Democratic candidates.
It will take constant vigilance to respond to and counter false attacks and narratives from President Trump, Republicans and right-wing media.
It will take constant vigilance on Election Day to ensure a fair election and prevent cheating and voter suppression by Mr. Trump and Republicans.
It would seem that the worst and most corrupt president in American history would be easy to remove. Yet tyrants around the world have come to power and stayed, because people did not take the threat seriously and consoled themselves with false assurances — “He can’t win,” or “It won’t happen again” — instead of doing the hard work to be sure it does not happen!
John E. Colbert
Arroyo Seco, N.M.
To the Editor:
The real strategic question in the next election is which platform — moderate or progressive — will resonate with the greatest number of voters in the battleground states. It is clear that Bret Stephens prefers the moderate — a candidate focused on infrastructure spending, a carbon tax and “modest increases in taxes on the wealthy matched to the promise of a balanced budget.”
However, I believe that the priorities favored by the more progressive candidates make them more electable: accessible and affordable health care, a “Manhattan Project” to combat climate change, regulations targeting corporate and government corruption, affordable college education and a more progressive tax system designed to decrease income inequality.
Michael Fishbein
Falmouth, Mass.
To the Editor:
While I agree with Bret Stephens’s thesis that the defeat of Donald Trump in the 2020 election is not a given, I disagree with his prescription for a Democratic win. Yes, the more radical ideas of Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, which in fact might help Middle America the most, would never pass Congress and will never gain favor with conservative rural Americans.
But, likewise, his suggestions about carbon taxes, infrastructure spending and modest tax increases on the wealthy are unlikely to gain much traction with Middle America. The Democrats must figure out a way to address the frustration and anger of those living in small towns where economies have crumbled and a lack of job opportunities has opened the door for a demagogue like Mr. Trump.
To win, the Democrats must turn some of that red ocean of the middle of the country purple and deliver hope to so many left behind by the rapid changes caused by globalization, automation and other factors.
Ernest Stokely
Dallas
To the Editor:
Bret Stephens says the country needs a bar of soap to cleanse ourselves of the grime of the Trump administration. The Republican Party has one: former Gov. Bill Weld, who is running against President Trump and promises to balance the budget and address climate change, and is just fine with Roe v. Wade, marriage equality and legal marijuana. Plus he’s a model of civility and has a sense of humor. He’s the soap Mr. Stephens is looking for!
Ann Schwartz
New York