Are You Losing Your Memory, or Not?
To the Editor:
Re “Memory Need Not Fail Us,” by Daniel J. Levitin (Sunday Review, Jan. 12):
We all accept that when we age, we cannot run as fast as before; our vision, hearing and smell diminish; our bones become brittle; our skin is thinner and full of pigmented areas; there’s loss and graying of hair; our equilibrium is affected; we become more sensitive to medication and so on.
So why should our memory be untouched? Isn’t this just wishful thinking?
Chris van der Linden
Ghent, Belgium
The writer is a neurologist.
To the Editor:
I’d be curious to know how intentional memorization relates to old and new memories.
As a 68-year-old actor, I can call up the part of Hamlet, which I last played more than 10 years ago, effortlessly, and other Shakespearean roles with a cursory brush-up.
For the last two years I’ve been performing a 10,000-word piece by Samuel Beckett, and I’m working on learning an equally long part. Sometimes it feels as if it’s a little tougher to achieve retention than it used to be, but eventually, by dint of simple repetition, I get there.
The point being: If you use it, you won’t lose it.
Thomas Caron
Shanghai
To the Editor:
I hope that everyone my age — 89 — will feel as relieved as I did to find out that my small lapses are simply the product of an overstuffed brain and not a ghastly disease.
Anne Bernays
Cambridge, Mass.
The writer is a columnist for Pangyrus magazine and a writing teacher.
To the Editor:
Re “Amid Plans to Expand Penn Station, Tunnels Await Trump’s Help” (news article, Jan. 13):
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s ambitious plans to create an Empire State Complex surrounding Penn Station, including adding tracks south of the station if the Gateway project happens or not, overshoots the opportunity to create an architecturally significant, modern transportation center and public space akin to Grand Central Terminal in New York, Union Station in Washington or St. Pancras Station in London.
A more cost-effective use of the large sums of money needed to buy a city block south of the station and placing unnecessary additional tracks there would be to pursue conversion of the entirety of the existing Penn Station track plan to a “through” station as opposed to a partly “terminal” one.
The money saved could be used to build or expand regional hubs (Newark and Long Island City) as advocated by Rethink NYC. This should be done in combination with the rebuilding of the original McKim, Mead & White Penn Station thoroughly updated for 21st-century transportation needs.
In this way, Penn Station can be returned to its rightful place as one of the finest transportation centers, public spaces and architectural buildings in the world.
Sam Turvey
New York
The writer is chair of Rethink Penn Station NYC.
To the Editor:
We appreciate Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s desire to get an expansion project done at Penn Station. But first things first: A second Hudson tunnel remains the highest transportation priority for the city. New York cannot walk away from this necessity.
Further development of the Penn Station site should not be a consolation prize. At a minimum, a nine-month wait for the next presidential election may be worthwhile to ascertain what the long-term options are.
In addition, there are organizations, including ours, that look at this site as an opportunity to restore the original Penn Station, a classic design that is easily adapted for this new expanded role.
The demolition of this great New York landmark is a decadeslong error that still calls out for correction. Not to mention that any development must include a relocation of Madison Square Garden to an area that is not burdened by hundreds of thousands of daily travelers.
This is a once-in-a-lifetime chance to get everything done right.
Ronald B. Levine
Philadelphia
The writer is director of the City Conservancy.
To the Editor:
Re “Too Little ‘Choice’ in Health Care” (Op-Ed, Jan. 15):
Wendell Potter believes in a government-run system that we think will raise costs and won’t work. Today’s health insurance providers believe that everyone deserves affordable, high-quality coverage and care, regardless of health status, income or pre-existing conditions.
Americans have many health care choices. Take Medicare Advantage versus traditional Medicare: On average, beneficiaries can choose from 28 private plans. More private plan choices are available for those who buy individual coverage.
We focus on prevention and promoting an individual’s best health. We not only provide coverage and access to care, but also tackle social barriers to health, like lack of stable housing or food. Eliminating private choice means higher costs and lower quality.
Mr. Potter’s industry perspectives are from the past, before the Affordable Care Act. We are focused on building on what works and fixing what doesn’t.
Matt Eyles
Washington
The writer is president and chief executive of America’s Health Insurance Plans.