Did Fox News Edit an Interview at Trump’s Request? Chris Wallace Says No
On Dec. 10, 2016, the Fox News anchor Chris Wallace spent several hours interviewing Donald J. Trump for an episode of “Fox News Sunday.” Mr. Wallace spoke with Mr. Trump at Trump Tower in Manhattan and then flew with Mr. Trump and his advisers to the Army-Navy football game in Baltimore, where their conversation continued.
In the broadcast, which aired the next day, Mr. Wallace pressed the president-elect about Russian intervention in the 2016 election, his unorthodox cabinet appointments and why Mr. Trump believed it was ethical to maintain his private business interests while in office.
One exchange between the two men did not make the cut: a question about Michael G. Flynn, the son of Mr. Trump’s choice for national security adviser, Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn. The younger Mr. Flynn had been fired from the transition team days earlier for spreading incendiary conspiracy theories on social media.
Why that exchange never aired is now a question in political circles. It emerged this week that Stephen K. Bannon, Mr. Trump’s former campaign manager, told the special counsel’s office in 2018 that “Fox agreed to cut out that part of the interview” after it was deemed “embarrassing for Trump.” The Mueller report summaries were released after a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit from BuzzFeed News and CNN in 2019.
Mr. Wallace told The New York Times on Tuesday that Mr. Bannon’s accusation was “utter foolishness and completely misleading,” and that he had never agreed to any editorial changes at the behest of Mr. Trump or his aides.
Mr. Trump did indeed ask that the exchange be excised, Mr. Wallace said. But the anchor said his decision to leave the question out of the broadcast had been based solely on the news value of Mr. Trump’s reply — or, in this case, lack thereof.
In his first public remarks about Mr. Bannon’s accusation, Mr. Wallace described to The Times his day with the president-elect.
According to Mr. Wallace, he asked Mr. Trump about Mr. Flynn’s tweets during the first part of the interview, at Trump Tower. “The president-elect,” Mr. Wallace said, replied that “he didn’t know anything about it and he would look into it.”
“I just thought, ‘That didn’t go anywhere, and I’m not going to use it,’” Mr. Wallace said, adding that he knew he would have to edit the footage to fit the one-hour format of “Fox News Sunday.”
Later, on the plane ride to Baltimore, the president-elect brought up the earlier exchange, telling the anchor that Mr. Flynn’s father considered the question “embarrassing,” Mr. Wallace said.
“The president said to me, ‘Can you take that out?’” Mr. Wallace recalled. “He asked me not to run something that I never intended to run in the first place.”
Asked what he had told Mr. Trump, Mr. Wallace said: “I don’t know exactly what I said, but I indicated that it wasn’t going to run.” He added: “If the president had made even a scintilla of news on the subject, of course I would have run it, and I wouldn’t have cared what the president had said.”
Fox News’s treatment of Mr. Trump is often scrutinized, in no small part because the network’s leading opinion hosts are outspoken boosters of the president and his agenda.
Mr. Wallace, a veteran Washington hand who moderated a presidential debate in 2016, is a news anchor for the network, not a commentator. He has earned Mr. Trump’s ire in the past for asking tough questions — and offering tough analysis — of the president and his senior aides.
Since taking office, Mr. Trump has also insulted Mr. Wallace on Twitter, comparing him unfavorably to his father, the “60 Minutes” anchor Mike Wallace. “My reaction is always: ‘One of us has a daddy problem, and it’s not me,’” Chris Wallace said at a panel in Manhattan last year.
In the interview with The Times, Mr. Wallace said no one else at Fox News had any input in the editing process for his 2016 interview with Mr. Trump.
Recently, news outlets including ABC News, The Times and The Daily Caller, among others, have published unedited transcripts of their reporters’ interviews with Mr. Trump. Asked if he would release footage or a transcript of his question to Mr. Trump about Mr. Flynn, Mr. Wallace said he would not.
“It’s a pretty strong journalistic principle that we don’t release our outtakes, and newsrooms have gone to the courts to try and protect their work product that doesn’t air or run in a newspaper,” Mr. Wallace said. “There’s certainly nothing that Steve Bannon says that would lead me to bend on this principle.”
“I’m trying to set the record straight,” Mr. Wallace added. “I can understand people wondering. But there’s no there there.”
Mr. Bannon did not immediately respond to a request for comment.