Anticipating a Senate Vote to Acquit Trump
To the Editor:
Re “A Dishonorable Senate” (editorial, Feb. 3):
The Democrats knew they would probably never get the Senate votes to oust President Trump. Their goal was to use the impeachment process to expose corruption in the Trump administration. Mission accomplished — and with an unexpected bonus.
The impeachment hearings showed that the Republican Congress is totally subservient to Donald Trump and willing to stomp on the Constitution. No one will forget that performance. It won’t take much to flip the Senate to the Democrats in 2020.
Mr. Trump and his accomplices have shown that they are self-serving, dishonest and unfit for public office. And there is likely even more evidence ahead. The “drip, drip” of new information will continue to leak, including how Republicans rig elections.
So it’s “Game On” for the 2020 election. The Democrats have handed Mr. Trump plenty to worry about.
Just as Nancy Pelosi planned.
Mark Kelley
Marshfield, Mass.
To the Editor:
Let’s face reality: After what happened on Friday — with the Senate abasing itself utterly by refusing to call witnesses — President Trump’s address Tuesday night should be called “The State of the Kingdom.”
Betsy Burr
Pompton Plains, N.J.
To the Editor:
When Alan Dershowitz stood before the Senate and said that whatever a president might do in seeking re-election could not be considered impeachable, I would have expected that at least a few senators might have thrown their milk at him before walking out in protest. None did. No Senate Republican dismissed this notion of an unchecked executive as a dangerous, tyrannical idea.
I taught American history and government for 20 years. I always reminded my students that the Constitution, however ingenious its construction, was mere words on paper. Most countries have nice constitutions filled with glorious language. I taught my students that Americans always needed to defend and strengthen the principles and ideals of our system or we could lose them.
Congress is filled with cowardly Republicans, terrified of President Trump and his Twitter fingers, comfortable with the notion of a president who cares for nothing but his personal gain. I had been hoping that Republicans would finally stand up and put country before party. But watching this trial in the Senate has kicked the hope right out of me.
Peter Whitehouse
Mount Pleasant, S.C.
To the Editor:
Re “A Party Now Less Likely to Tell Trump ‘Enough’” (“Trump on Trial” series, front page, Feb. 1):
Carl Hulse asks if G.O.P. senators will ever say “enough” when it comes to President Trump and his ostensibly wrongful behavior. Well, it appears that Republican senators have indeed said “enough,” not with respect to Mr. Trump’s behavior, but rather with the shameful behavior of the Democrats and their handmaidens in the liberal media. They’ve said “enough” with the endless stunts and manufactured scandals designed to remove Mr. Trump from office. They’ve said “enough” with the half-baked plots to overturn the results of the 2016 election.
From faithless electors, the emoluments clause, Russian collusion, the 25th Amendment and obstruction of justice to the Ukraine impeachment scam, the left has deployed one cockamamie scheme after another to dislodge Mr. Trump from the presidency. The whole puerile process reminds me of the old Wile E. Coyote/Road Runner cartoon, with Road Runner eluding the coyote at the end of each episode.
At this point, there are a lot of people who are saying “enough.” Because enough is enough.
Michael J. DiStefano
Jamestown, R.I.
To the Editor:
Assuming an acquittal, I would urge the House managers to propose censuring the president for his actions. It is a fallback, but it is something. If successful, it might serve to address the concerns about “inappropriate behavior” some Republicans, in addition to Senator Lamar Alexander, might harbor. It would also help to caution against future bad behavior regarding both election interference and the balance of power.
Patsy Gesell
New York
To the Editor:
Apparently Donald Trump can sit in an office on Pennsylvania Avenue and shoot holes in the Constitution and not lose voters in the Senate.
Ronald Katz
New York