If Bernie Wins, Where Will He Take the Democratic Party?
On Monday night, the Iowa caucuses ended in chaos. More important, the partial results released on Tuesday suggest that the Democratic path to the White House remains rocky.
A number of analysts and political scientists with whom I spoke initially described Joe Biden as the candidate to beat, but the two clear beneficiaries of Monday’s caucuses were Bernie Sanders and Pete Buttigieg.
The popular vote as of Tuesday night provided a degree of momentum to both candidates, with Sanders slightly in front. Under Iowa’s arcane system of delegate allocation, however, Buttigieg pulled ahead of Sanders, 26.8 to 25.2 percent, giving Buttigieg’s bid for the White House new legitimacy.
So far, Buttigieg has encountered difficulty winning support among black voters, whose enthusiastic turnout will be crucial to a Democratic victory in November. In South Carolina, as Politico reported on Jan. 24:
Buttigieg was at 2 percent among black voters in a recent Fox News poll. Elijah Anderson, a professor of sociology and African-American Studies at Yale, observed that “Buttigieg made a surprise showing, and then took advantage by making the early rounds of the news shows.” In 2016, Hillary Clinton was fatally handicapped by relatively low black turnout compared with 2008 and 2012, the years Barack Obama ran.
Both Sanders and Buttigieg could be high-risk choices for the Democratic Party. While Buttigieg now seems to have a legitimate shot at the nomination, none of the experts I contacted were prepared to put him in the top tier.
Eitan Hersh, a Tufts political scientist, responded to my inquiry:
Charles Stewart, a political scientist at M.I.T., wrote:
Suzanne Model, a professor emerita of sociology at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, told me that
Others put Sanders in the top tier.
“Sanders is still the most likely beneficiary from a fractured race,” Matt Grossmann, a political scientist a Michigan State, wrote me late Tuesday:
The potential pitfalls for the Democratic Party of nominating Sanders go beyond the possibility of losing to Trump again, raising the likelihood that the Senate will remain in Republican hands and threatening the re-election prospects of the 40+ Democrats who defeated Republicans in moderate districts in 2018.
The next step is the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 11, where Sanders currently has a strong 8.6 percentage point lead, according to RealClearPolitics.
If Sanders wins New Hampshire, there will almost certainly be an establishment-led drive to block him from the nomination.
Looking toward the general election in November, the RealClearPolitics average of the seven most recent national head-to-head surveys shows Sanders ahead of Trump by 3.7 points, 49.0 to 45.3.
Those polls were taken before any concerted Republican efforts to demonize Sanders, which are certain to start in earnest if he becomes the nominee. Sanders’s Democratic opponents have shown little inclination to publicly test his general election weaknesses, fearful that such an effort would backfire.
Sanders stands out among the leading Democratic presidential candidates in that none of the others have accumulated as many potentially debilitating liabilities as he has over 50 active years in politics.
Sanders, wrote Richard North Patterson, the novelist and former chair of Common Cause, in an article posted on The Bulwark on Jan. 29,
Not only does Sanders currently take positions that would be tough to defend in the general election — a Medicare for All plan eliminating private health coverage, a ban on fracking highly unpopular in Pennsylvania, the decriminalization of illegal border crossings — but in the past he has also argued for
Sanders’s positioning on the far left has been crucial to mobilizing pluralities of Democratic primary and caucus voters. But many studies show that in general elections, the nomination of more extreme candidates has alienated moderates and driven up voting for the opposition — in this case the Republican Party.
In their 2018 paper “Who Punishes Extremist Nominees? Candidate Ideology and Turning Out the Base in US Elections,” Andrew Hall and Daniel Thompson, political scientists at Stanford, write:
While a party’s base voters, especially those who turn out in primaries and caucuses “may prefer a more extreme nominee, the opposing party’s base voters dislike this extreme nominee more than the party’s base likes him or her,” Hall and Thompson write. The opposing party’s voters “care the most about a party nominating an extremist instead of a moderate.”
The consequences of nominating an extremist can be devastating. In an earlier 2015 paper, Hall found that:
Anthony Fowler, a political scientist at the University of Chicago who provided me with numerous studies of the effect of ideology on election outcomes, wrote by email:
While there are “idiosyncratic characteristics of candidates other than ideology that are relevant,” Fowler continued, “we know that ideology is extremely important and that this puts Sanders and Warren at a significant disadvantage in the general election.”
Sanders’s weaknesses have been cataloged by a variety of writers, including Jonathan Chait in a recent New York magazine article, “Running Bernie Sanders Against Trump Would Be an Act of Insanity” and by my Times colleague Timothy Egan in his column last week, “Bernie Sanders Can’t Win.”
Sander’s vulnerabilities, Chait writes,
Chait bolstered his critique of those arguing for full-throated support of the most liberal policies by citing the success of moderates and the defeat of more radical candidates in flipping seats from Republican to Democrat in the 2018 congressional elections.
The recruitment of moderates by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, Chait writes,
Sanders’s ascendancy in the nomination fight places the Democratic Party in a double bind. Not only is he potentially a dangerously weak general election candidate but, if an Anybody-But-Bernie movement materializes and successfully defeats him at the convention, Sanders supporters — more than backers of any other major candidates — are likely to bolt on Election Day and vote for either a third-party candidate or even Trump (as many Sanders supporters did in 2016), or sit out the contest altogether. In 2016, more than 7 million votes were cast for third-party candidates, more than enough to have given the election to Hillary Clinton.
A January 22-23 Emerson College survey asked Democratic primary voters “will you vote for the Democratic nominee even if it is not your candidate?” 87 percent of Joe Biden supporters said yes, as did 90 percent of those backing Elizabeth Warren and 86 percent of those aligned with Pete Buttigieg. 53 percent of Sanders supporters said yes, 16 percent said no, and 31 percent said they were undecided.
If that were not enough, Sanders loyalists have been primed by their belief that in 2016 the Democratic National Committee backed Hillary Clinton and view the Democratic establishment with deep suspicion — as evidenced by the displays of anger and resentment toward party leaders at two Sanders events earlier this month in Iowa.
As Michael Tomasky pointed out in a Daily Beast article on Feb, 4, “Iowa Caucuses on the First Day of What’s Poised to be the Ugliest Democratic Primary Fight Ever,” if Sanders becomes the clear front-runner and the party establishment tries to block him, the story line will be
There are election analysts, including a number of conservatives, who say that they believe that Sanders would be a credible nominee with a good chance of beating Trump.
In “Don’t Believe Anyone Who Says Bernie Sanders Can’t Win,” David French, who used to write for National Review and is now published in The Dispatch, argued on Jan. 30:
Now imagine, French continued,
French concluded:
Along similar lines, Drew Holden, a Republican consultant, wrote “Of course Bernie Sanders can win,” on Feb. 3 in The Washington Post:
On the liberal side, Matthew Yglesias took on the assignment of making the best case for Bernie Sanders in Vox: “Bernie Sanders can unify Democrats and beat Trump in 2020”:
Toward the end of his essay, however, Yglesias sounds more skeptical. “At the end of the day, Sanders’s record is not nearly as scary as many establishment Democrats fear. His ‘revolution’ rhetoric doesn’t make sense to me, but he’s been an effective mayor and legislator for a long time,” Yglesias writes, adding “Some of his big ideas are not so hot on the merits, but it’s not worth worrying about them because the political revolution is so unrealistic.”
Most political scientists I contacted this week saw greater disadvantages for the Democratic Party in a Sanders nomination than in the possible selection of other leading candidates.
Andrew Engelhardt, a postdoctoral researcher at Brown, wrote, that
Engelhardt then noted that a January Economist survey “found that independent and Republican identifiers see Sanders as quite extreme relative to most other prospective Democratic candidates.”
Winning Republican voters is a lost cause for any Democrat, Engelhardt noted, but nominating Sanders could turn away
Wendy Schiller, a political scientist who is also at Brown, noted in an email that
At the moment, Schiller continued,
Hersh, the Tufts political scientist, raised a different set of concerns about a Sanders nomination, primarily that he would mobilize conservatives:
How would a Sanders nomination influence the outcome of races for Senate, House and local offices?
“Lots of caveats here,” Hersh wrote,
Now it may be that the country is ready to elect as president a 78-year-old angry democratic socialist calling for revolution. But if I were a partisan whose top priority was to bring the Trump presidency to an end, I would not bank on it.