With Split Decision on Impeachment, Maine Democrat Risks a Dual Backlash
LEWISTON, Maine — Standing on the House floor minutes after voting to impeach President Trump, Representative Jared Golden replayed in his head the criticism streaming through his office phone lines and inbox. Then he did exactly what those voters had warned against: He broke with his own party and voted against a second article of impeachment.
In doing so, Mr. Golden, a Maine Democrat, became the only member of the House to split his decision on a historic matter with grave implications for the president and the nation’s political landscape. His unusual choice to charge Mr. Trump with abuse of power but not with obstruction of Congress has left Mr. Golden open to a backlash from Republicans and independents who oppose impeaching the president and Democrats who are determined that he should be removed at all costs.
The decision by Mr. Golden is part of a larger bet animating his first term in Congress: that his willingness to openly flout some of the key orthodoxies of his party will appeal enough to his famously independent-minded constituents to help him hang onto his seat, rather than prompt voters to run him out of office.
“It might be a lonely place for me to be in Washington,” Mr. Golden said over beers at a mill turned brewery here in his hometown. “But it’s not a lonely place for me to be here in Maine, and in my district.”
As the political aftershocks of Mr. Trump’s impeachment reverberate through towns across the United States, Mr. Golden’s case is a critical test of how voters will react to a deeply partisan process with unpredictable consequences for both parties. Mr. Golden, who narrowly beat out a Republican incumbent in 2018 to win his sprawling district that supported Mr. Trump by 10 points, helped hand Democrats their House majority, and his fate in 2020 will help determine whether his party can keep control.
The political risks for Mr. Golden also underscore how difficult it has become for a lawmaker who is willing to cross party lines on some of the most fraught issues to survive and stake out a role for himself in Congress at a time when partisan loyalty is more expected than ever.
As the two parties pulled further apart and dug into their opposing corners on impeachment, the threat of political backlash from each side’s core voters hollowed out the most dissent. It prompted two lawmakers to switch their party affiliations: Representative Justin Amash of Michigan announced in July that he would leave the Republican Party, where he had been the lone sitting member in favor of impeachment, to become an independent, while Representative Jeff Van Drew of New Jersey voted against both impeachment articles and left the Democratic Party the next day to become a Republican.
Others opted to leave elected office altogether, like Representative Francis Rooney, Republican of Florida, who announced he would not run for re-election a day after saying he would be open to supporting impeachment. (Mr. Rooney ultimately stuck with 100 percent of his party and voted “no” on both charges last month.)
“The split is much deeper than ever before, and the people who cross the lines are penalized,” said William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine and a former senator, who held Mr. Golden’s seat in the House and was one of the first Republicans to break from his party and support the impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon.
That dynamic, to some political observers, made Mr. Golden’s decision to back only one of two impeachment articles all the more perplexing. He argued that the obstruction of Congress charge against Mr. Trump was not warranted because House Democrats had not fought hard enough in the courts to try to force critical administration officials to testify in their impeachment inquiry.  The decision, he said, was not a political calculation, but about establishing a solid precedent.
“People were automatically going to this cynical place of, ‘This young freshman thinks he can get away with pleasing both sides,’” said Mr. Golden, 37. “‘He doesn’t understand he’s about to get run over by a Mack truck that’s coming right down the middle of the road.’”
A tattooed former Marine infantryman who fought in Afghanistan and Iraq, Mr. Golden has cut a low profile in Washington but pounded the pavement of his sprawling, largely rural district that covers four-fifths of the state. A former homeland security committee aide to Senator Susan Collins, he rose through the ranks of the Maine Legislature, where even as the majority whip, he was known to break from party positions and vote down legislation he disagreed with.
It was that reputation that propelled Mr. Golden to Congress in 2018, and he has worked to burnish his credentials as an independent-minded fresh face in Washington. He was one of two Democrats to vote against the party’s signature gun control bill, but a fierce defender of the party’s centerpiece anticorruption and voting rights bill. He did not support Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s bid for speaker.
“I vote with the Democratic Party like 88 percent of the time,” Mr. Golden said. “That’s, I think, a perfect way to step back and compare it to past Congresses and see how truly divided and partisan Congress has become — that I’m now one of the standout members.”
On no other issue has there been more political pressure than on impeachment. When the American Action Network, a conservative advocacy group, began a $2.5 million ad buy against lawmakers who won Trump districts and voted for impeachment, Mr. Golden was at the top of its list. The House Republican campaign arm crowed that his vote would cost him his job. A Republican challenger vying to unseat Mr. Golden rallied a small group of protesters in front of his office here.
“I have not seen a single conservative or Republican voter who said, “I really appreciate that you only voted to impeach Trump on one count rather than two,” said Kiernan Majerus-Collins, the chairman of the Lewiston Democrats.
Mr. Golden’s explanation for his vote, on the other hand, angered and frustrated some Democrats, including the author and famous Mainer Stephen King. As one of Mr. Golden’s constituents, Mr. King threatened on Twitter to “work with all my might to see him defeated next year” if he followed through with it.
“Unflattering comparisons to Maine’s senior senator have certainly been made,” Mr. Majerus-Collins said, referring to Ms. Collins (who is not related). Ms. Collins, a Republican who has her own reputation as a pivotal swing vote able to make or break legislation, is viewed with suspicion and anger by many Democrats who believe she flirts with crossing party lines only to protect herself politically.
In some ways, the two are grappling with similar challenges. Beginning her re-election campaign last month, Ms. Collins played up what she called her independent streak: “In today’s polarized political environment, is there still a role for a centrist who believes in getting things done through compromise, collegiality, and bipartisanship? I have concluded that the answer to this question is ‘yes,’” she said.
But Mr. Golden’s path in the House is far different. Where an island of one in the Senate can be the most powerful place to be, in the hierarchal House, a lone lawmaker who breaks from party ranks does so at his or her political peril.
Still, on impeachment, Mr. Golden’s decision appears to have won over some voters in a state that prides itself on its tradition of fierce political independence.
“It takes some courage to do that when a lot of people just follow their party. That’s what everyone doesn’t like,” said Bill Waterman, 60, of Litchfield. “People here in Maine are very independent thinkers. We want somebody who’s going to do the right thing and not just what the party says to do.”
Mr. Waterman is an independent voter who supported Mr. Golden in 2018 because he believed that his opponent, former Representative Bruce Poliquin, a Republican, had become too entrenched in the Washington establishment. His thoughts on Mr. Trump are more complicated.
“Sometimes, the president does something good, that you liked, and it’s good,” he said, “Other times, you just cringe.”
Jim McManus, 64, who lives in the nearby town of Auburn, said he believed Mr. Golden's decision was an “honest” one.
“Even people who may disagree respect that type of approach,” Mr. McManus said.
The move may also have lost Mr. Golden some votes. Michele Davidson, a Sabbatus resident, said she felt he had “let us down” by voting to impeach Mr. Trump and would not support him again in 2020. Ms. Davidson had voted for him in 2018, she said, because “he was new, he had fresh ideas.”
But internal polling conducted by both Republicans and Democrats shows that Ms. Davidson may be an anomaly. Brad Parscale, the president’s campaign manager, posted polling on Twitter last month that showed voters in some of the most conservative Democratic-held districts said a vote for impeachment would either have no effect on their support or make them more likely to re-elect their representative.
“Mainers,” Mr. McManus said, “don’t like to be pigeonholed.”