Debate Over the Rules for Trump’s Trial
To the Editor:
Re “McConnell Plans for Senate Trial on a Speedy Pace” (front page, Jan. 21):
In the Federalist Papers No. 65, Alexander Hamilton, talking about the reasoning behind giving the Senate the power to try impeachments, wrote: “Where else than in the Senate could have been found a tribunal sufficiently dignified, or sufficiently independent? What other body would be likely to feel confidence enough in its own situation, to preserve, unawed and uninfluenced, the necessary impartiality between an individual accused, and the representatives of the people, his accusers?”
Stirring words, but Hamilton clearly did not foresee a situation in which the majority leader of the Senate, far from being independent, declared that he would take his lead from the president and that he was not impartial, despite having to take an oath that requires impartiality, and several of his fellow senators have expressed similar views. Dignity? Impartiality? Independence? Not this Senate.
John T. Dillon
West Caldwell, N.J.
To the Editor:
Because Chief Justice John Roberts has Supreme Court responsibilities in the morning and cannot begin his impeachment duties until 1 p.m., Mitch McConnell’s compressed trial schedule would result in a trial that would go, with breaks, well beyond 1 a.m. Doesn’t this amount to forced sleep deprivation for the jurors, not to mention the chief justice?
What’s more, how can jurors be expected to process information efficiently and think rationally over a span of 12 hours extending beyond bedtime? Or is rational thought no longer considered necessary in trials?
I mean, really — a trial held in the middle of the night? Who does that? Oh yes — people in dystopian nightmares.
Vicki Riba Koestler
Alexandria, Va.
Editors’ Note: After this letter was published online, the schedule for the 24 hours for each side to argue its case in the impeachment trial was extended from two days to three.
To the Editor:
Mitch McConnell and other Republican senators argue that the Senate should not allow new witnesses or documents in the impeachment trial of President Trump because the House should have gone to court to enforce its subpoenas. This argument is simply illogical. The House is not to blame for the absence of key evidence; the defendant is.
The Supreme Court ruled, in President Richard Nixon’s case, that material requested as part of an impeachment inquiry must be produced by the administration. Mr. Trump’s complete stonewalling of the House is illegal. As the branch charged with enforcing the law, the executive failed in its duty. The House did not.
Jonathan R. Wagner
Buda, Tex.
To the Editor:
Limiting news coverage to only Senate-controlled TV cameras is outrageous and undemocratic. Yet, when put in context, it simply follows through on Mitch McConnell’s intent to collude with the administration’s corrupt cover-up. At the outset of the trial Democrats should insist on a vote to overturn this insidious ploy.
Jim Tackett
New Haven, Conn.
To the Editor:
Whatever happened to Plan B, censure of the president? This would have a good chance of passing. Since the bar is now being set so high for “high crimes and misdemeanors,” censuring would make the point and avoid impeachment. Too late now, or is it?
Carla Wallach
Greenwich, Conn.
To the Editor:
In any trial if the defendant employed the spouse of a judge or juror, wouldn’t that constitute the basis for recusal of the judge or dismissal of the juror? Is not the secretary of transportation (Elaine Chao) the wife of one of the key jurors, Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, and employed by the defendant, the president of the United States, serving at his pleasure?
Nicholas Marchelos
Buffalo
To the Editor:
Re “A Conservative Contrarian With High-Profile Clients” (news article, Jan. 18):
If Alan Dershowitz is, as he says, acting in defense of the Constitution, then he is doing so at the expense of democracy. His advocacy in this matter serves to enable a president who does not believe in freedom of the press, does not believe in coequal branches of government, and does not believe in the rule of law unless it suits his purposes.
I respect Mr. Dershowitz’s desire to protect the Constitution, but the irony is that he will be doing it in service of a president bent on destroying it.
Jeremy Driesen
New York
To the Editor:
Although I am not an attorney, I will offer some advice to President Trump’s legal team: Get paid up front!
I. Milton Karabell
Philadelphia