What’s Going On in This Graph? | Engagement Ring Costs
These graphs, which show how much people spend on engagement rings, appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
By Friday morning, Feb. 14, we will provide the “Reveal” — the graphs’ free online link, additional background and questions, shout outs highlighting student comments and headlines, and Stat Nuggets.
After looking closely at the graphs above (or at this full-size image), think about these three questions:
The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order. Start with “I notice,” then “I wonder,” and end with a catchy headline.
2. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment online. Teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students say.)
3. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
On Wednesday, Feb. 12, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, Feb. 14, we will reveal more information about the graphs at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graphs differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
For Valentine’s Day, we may buy our loved ones cards and candy. But, for a most serious commitment, we may buy an engagement ring. How much do we spend on this commitment? Based on a poll of 1,640 adults by Morning Consult done for the New York Times Upshot, the median amount spent is $1,900, which is about two weeks’ pay.
The histogram of how much we spend on engagement rings and the bar chart of what share of income is spent on an engagement ring appeared previously in the New York Times article “Three Months’ Salary for an Engagement Ring? For Most People, It’s More Like Two Weeks.” The bar chart reveals a surprise. Overall, respondents spent less than two weeks pay (about 3 - 4 percent of their annual pay) on a ring, but respondents who were paid the least spent 9.5 weeks of their pay (17 percent of their annual pay) on a ring.
Here are some of the headlines that really capture the meaning of these graphs: “Engagement Economy” by Avery of Hoggard High School in Wilmington, North Carolina, “The Rings of Love Become the Rings of Pain” by Mohamed of Academy for Software Engineering, New York, “Engagement Rings, Hand Over 2 Weeks’ Salary” by Riley of Bush, and “The Price of a Promise” by Soren of Eden Prairie, Minnesota.
You may want to think critically about these questions.
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graphs.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going On in This Graph?” which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data.
Keep noticing and wondering. We continue to welcome your responses.
Join us Wednesday, Feb. 26 to notice and wonder about global temperatures. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern time during the live online moderation.
________
To see all previously published Stat Nuggets with links to their graphs, go to this index.
HISTOGRAM
A histogram summarizes the distribution of a quantitative variable by showing the frequency (count) or relative frequency (percentage) of the values that fall in specific intervals. The intervals are along the x-axis. Bars drawn above the corresponding intervals represent the frequency or relative frequency of values falling in each of the intervals. These numbers or percentages are shown on the y-axis.
The engagement ring cost graph is a histogram. The quantitative variable displayed in the histogram is the cost of engagement rings. The x-axis is marked in intervals of width $500. The y-axis displays the number of people who purchased rings in each cost interval.
BAR CHART
A bar chart is a graphical representation of categorical data. Bar charts can be useful in comparing subgroups’ statistics.
The bar chart of share of income spent on an engagement ring shows the number of weeks or months worth of income that respondents for each annual income category spent on their rings. The subgroups are the 5 income categories. They are ordered in ascending order by income.
NORMAL vs. SKEWED DISTRIBUTION
A normal distribution is symmetric (as if reflected in a mirror) with one peak (or unimodal). Some call it a bell curve due to its shape. A skewed distribution is asymmetric (not symmetric) with a longer “tail” in the direction of its skew.
The shape of the histogram of engagement ring cost, is not normal. Due to the long tail on the right side of the graph the distribution of ring prices is skewed right. About 80 percent of those polled spent less than $5,000 on a ring. The right tail includes only 20 percent of those polled, half of which spent more than $15,000.
SAMPLE
A sample is a subset of a population. A sample can be used to make generalizations about the population from which it was selected if the sample is representative of the population. The simplest way to obtain a representative sample is to select the sample randomly from the population.If the sample is not randomly selected from the population, the resulting statistics may be biased and may lead to incorrect conclusions about the population. The larger the random sample, the more sure we can be that the sample will give good information about the population.
In the engagement ring sample, the population of interest is all people who have bought engagement rings. The sample consists of the 1,640 adults that were surveyed. We are told that the poll of 1,640 adults is nationally representative, but we have no further details about how this sample was selected. . However, the sample size is large and if this large sample was selected randomly we can use the data from this sample to draw conclusions about how much all purchasers of engagement rings spent (on average) to express their commitment.
_________
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Erica Chauvet, a mathematics professor at Waynesburg University in Pennsylvania, and moderates online with Jennifer Mueller, high school mathematics teacher at Parkway North High School in Creve Coeur, Missouri and adjunct professor of mathematics at the University of Missouri St. Louis.