$1 Million Homes in South Dakota, Illinois and Rhode Island
Sitting on the shores of the Missouri River, as well as at the edge of an Arnold Palmer-designed golf course, this property is in a 2,000-acre master-planned community with about 1,250 homes, about five miles south of North Sioux City, S.D., and seven miles west of downtown Sioux City, Iowa. (Its location in the extreme southeastern corner of the state also places it near the border of Nebraska.) Interstate 29 runs nearby, with access to major east-west freeways.
Size: 4,070 square feet
Price per square foot: $245
Indoors: Designed by the principals of PLaN Architecture, in Sioux City, as their own residence, the building has cast-concrete walls with stained cedar siding inside and out, large windows with electronically operable shades and an integrated sound system. The house number, written in jumbo-sized digits on a wall of the foyer, is visible through the glass front door and adjoining windows.
Beyond the foyer is a great room with 20-foot ceilings, hickory floors and a gas fireplace embedded in a central wall. On the other side of the wall is a glass-walled cubic seating area that functions as a side entrance. The open kitchen includes Bosch Benchmark appliances, a marble-tile backsplash, Poggenpohl cabinets and quartz countertops. The island is 15.5 feet long and has an integrated stovetop and wine refrigerator.
In 2018, the architect-owners built a ground-level addition with a master suite. It includes a sitting area overlooking the river and golf course, and a private outdoor patio. The master bathroom has double sinks floating on a long, wood vanity, an oval soaking tub and a walk-in glass shower.
Three additional bedrooms are upstairs, including a master suite with access to a private concrete deck, and a closet that contains laundry hookups, so there could be laundry facilities on both floors. The two guest bedrooms upstairs share a hall bathroom. There is also a second-floor den and family room.
Outdoor space: The home has concrete decks in front and off the great room to the side. Parking is in an attached three-car garage. The Dakota Dunes community includes two parks, with recreational amenities.
Taxes: $9,566 (2018), plus a $75 quarterly homeowner association fee
Contact: Sarah Espiritu, J & M Real Estate Group, Inc., 712-635-1675; nwia.paragonrels.com
Neil Frankel, an architect, and Cindy Coleman, an interior designer, are a married couple who bought and designed this apartment 25 years ago. Updates include a three-year-old kitchen.
The unit, which is zoned for residential and commercial use, is in the landmark Donohue building in the Printing House Row District in the South Loop. Constructed in 1883 as a printing factory and enlarged with a 1913 annex, the structure housed a publishing company until 1971 and was converted into condos in 1979. It is several blocks west of Michigan Avenue, within easy walking distance of the Art Institute of Chicago and Millennium Park to the north and the Field Museum of Natural History and Shedd Aquarium to the south. The neighborhood, which has grown increasingly vibrant over the years, is stocked with restaurants, bars, food markets and music venues. The subway station at Harrison Street is less than five minutes on foot.
Size: 3,500 square feet
Price per square foot: $285
Indoors: An elevator takes you to a fourth-floor vestibule, from which you enter the unit. A partition between hexagonal columns serves as a gallery wall while easing the visual transition into the loft, which has polished concrete floors, painted brick walls, exposed ductwork and factory-scaled windows.
Immediately to the left is an open office area with built-in fixtures. Up a platform to the right is a library defined by a facing pair of floor-to-ceiling bookshelves with rolling ladders (tucked behind the far bookshelf is a studio). This area, which includes a free-standing fireplace, could easily be converted into a third bedroom with a full en suite bathroom.
Behind the gallery, in the center of the loft, is an open kitchen and dining area with marble-topped Ernestomeda cabinetry and integrated Gaggenau appliances; it also serves as a breakfast bar. (A pair of wall ovens is embedded on the opposite side of the gallery wall.)
The living area adjacent to the kitchen stretches across the full depth of the unit, dwarfing a grand piano. It is bordered on the other side by frosted glass walls, beyond which are the two bedrooms, each with expansive integrated storage. The master includes a fireplace and an en suite bathroom. The guest room has use of a bathroom off the living area. All three bathrooms have glass-and-pear-wood vanities and Kohler fixtures. There is also a laundry area.
Outdoor space: The lakefront Grant Park, with its playing fields and gardens, is a few blocks east. Printer’s Row Park, which is about a third of an acre, is just up the street. Parking is available for lease in a number of nearby garages.
Taxes: $15,196 (2018), plus a $2,156 monthly homeowner fee covering heat, water, snow removal, cable, maintenance, common insurance and access to the condo gym
Contact: Kathleen Malone, Malone Residential, @Properties, 773-600-1551; properties.maloneresidential.com
Known as the Spencer-King House, this historic property is being sold with a developable two-acre building lot. (The house with 2.16 acres is available for $750,000.) It is in a prestigious community in Rhode Island, about 15 miles south of Providence and less than a mile west of Main Street and the Hill and Harbour district on Greenwich Cove. Fine schools, parks and beaches are a few minutes away.
Size: 4,315 square feet
Price per square foot: $232
Indoors: Twentieth-century modifications resulted in a new wing with two main-floor bedrooms and a bathroom between them, and the addition of a mudroom off the side of the house, facing the road.
The former dining room became a family room with wall paneling that was retrofitted in the 1920s from the building’s 17th-century shutters. It opens onto a screened porch overlooking the yard.
The original tiny kitchen was enlarged with a butler’s pantry, which remains, and was later moved to a keeping room and expanded. (It was replaced with a library.) The living room off the formal front entrance has nine-over-nine windows and one of the home’s eight working fireplaces.
Five bedrooms are on the second floor — six if you include a small room with a fireplace at the top of the stairs. There are also three bathrooms, including one with a slipper tub and a heated towel rack and another with a steam shower, hexagonal floor tiles and a tin ceiling.
The home has had recent foundation repairs, heating system upgrades and sewer connection.
Outdoor space: Outbuildings include a former icehouse, a chicken coop, a bathhouse next to the swimming pool and a potting shed with an antique privy. Parking is in a detached two-car garage.
Taxes: $13,349
Contact: Allen Gammons, Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices, Commonwealth Real Estate, 401-742-6050; commonmoves.com