Rethinking How We Choose Candidates
To the Editor:
Re “The Primary Process Makes No Sense” (column, Dec. 30):
David Leonhardt has excellent recommendations for improving the nomination process. Ranked-choice voting is essential. In any multiple-candidate primary or caucus anyone edging up to 30 percent can be declared the “winner.” This revised method would ensure a more broadly accepted candidate would succeed. The winner-take-all primaries should be revised to allocate delegates based on popular vote totals.
Debates with a stage-spanning assembly of contenders should be replaced by “town hall” settings where each candidate is individually interviewed by a panel of journalists.
A series of five regional primaries, spread from February to June with rotation of order every four years, should replace the mishmash of the current system.
The nominee should be the people’s choice, not the survivor of a jumbled process.
Dan Donovan
Brooklyn
To the Editor:
David Leonhardt’s column points out certain aspects of the primary system that make no sense and resulted in Donald Trump’s nomination. But the solutions he suggests are complex and impractical. The core of the problem with the primary system is the low level of turnout. This results in a small minority, usually the most extreme of each party, having disproportionate influence.
Perhaps ranked-choice voting would help. Absent that, I suggest that primaries should be governed by the quorum requirement common in many government bodies in order for the results to be recognized. Even a quorum requirement of 30 percent or 40 percent of eligible voters participating would be a vast improvement.
Facilitating early voting, absentee voting and keeping the polls open for longer periods, including weekends, would make the achievement of a quorum more easily attainable and would make the results more representative.
Martin Nussbaum
New York
To the Editor:
David Leonhardt is right to criticize the current primary system for selection of candidates, but partisanship itself is the problem.
I envision an open primary system, in which all voters can vote for candidates of any party. This would orient the candidates to the broad center of the electorate, rather than to the activist fringes of each party. The field would be winnowed in a series of nationwide primaries, so that no states are favored or ignored. In each round, candidates would need to receive a higher percentage of the vote to proceed to the next round, ending with two candidates for the general election.
Such a system would invert the hyperpartisan system and would engage the whole nation, not just the battleground states.
Ron Meyers
New York
To the Editor:
It is critical that the Democratic debates address process issues like this. While it is useful to know the candidates’ positions on health care, etc., it is just as important to figure out how Donald Trump has been able to run amok with the presidency.
What in our political system allowed him to get elected, and what has allowed him to misuse the presidency to such an extent? What changes should be made to prevent this? As Donald Trump has said, “I have an Article II where I have the right to do whatever I want as president.” He has gone further in that direction than anyone before him.
Chris Gilbert
Berkeley, Calif.