Tick, Tick, Tick. Why the Doomsday Clock Is Moving Closer to Midnight.
(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)
The Doomsday Clock has ticked 20 seconds closer to midnight.
The clock is a symbol of how close we are to “destroying our world” using “dangerous technologies of our own making,” according to the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, the nonprofit organization and publication that controls the clock. The closer it moves to midnight, the closer we are to Armageddon.
When the clock was created in 1947, the dangers were mostly about nuclear weapons proliferating after World War II. But in the decades since, the definition has expanded to include climate change and other disruptions caused by humans.
Recently, the Bulletin moved the Doomsday Clock forward, from two minutes to 100 seconds to midnight.
That’s the closest it’s ever been, largely because of heightened tensions and deteriorated communication between the United States and countries like Russia and Iran.
Jerry Brown, the former governor of California and now the executive chairman of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, is sounding the alarm.
“The danger of nuclear blunder is increasing, but because the average guy can’t do much about the nuclear arms race, it’s not a topic of general coverage,” Mr. Brown said. “But it has the same cataclysmic danger as climate change.”
[Read about Mr. Brown’s California-China Climate Institute.]
That’s not to say climate change doesn’t pose an existential threat to humanity, he said, but “climate change is going to move more slowly — it’s on a different temporal sequence.”
Mr. Brown said that according to the corps of scientists, global policy leaders and other experts who advise the Bulletin, the power and speed with which nuclear weapons can be deployed are rising.
“The tearing up of nuclear arms treaties,” he said, is a big problem, as is a lack of trustworthy communication between world leaders and their intelligence agencies.
That President Trump often makes decisions quickly and against the advice of career diplomats or Pentagon officials — as he did in ordering the killing of Iran’s most powerful commander — is a compounding factor, too, Mr. Brown said.
The steps the Bulletin urged to move the clock back are predictable, but would need support at the highest levels. They include U.S. and Russian leaders returning to the negotiating table over the landmark Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which is on the brink of dissolution. Nations should “publicly rededicate themselves to the temperature goal of the Paris climate agreement,” the Bulletin said, and take more action to fight the misuse of science and the spread of misinformation online, among other measures.
Mr. Brown said the threat of nuclear annihilation should be treated more like an ongoing emergency, though he knows it’s tough to wrap your mind around.
“You can talk about a tweet, you can talk about Nancy Pelosi tearing up a speech,” he said, referring to the House speaker. “But you can’t talk about the end of the world.”
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
Read more about how a lack of affordable housing in the state’s big cities is pushing up prices in the Central Valley. [The New York Times]
And if you missed it, read about the new ride-share and taxi pickup system at the airport. [The New York Times]
Now that you’re sufficiently concerned about the world ending, let’s talk about one of the best reasons to try and turn it around: Love.
Maybe you think Valentine’s Day is a marketing scam. But what we’re proposing here costs nothing but a few minutes of your time.
Tell us your tiny California love story.
The instructions are roughly the same as those for the Tiny Love Stories our friends in Modern Love publish from time to time. Write your love story — happy, sad, funny, romantic, filial, platonic — in no more than 100 words.
The only difference is that we are after stories that are uniquely Californian. Email us at CAToday@nytimes.com, and if you’d like your story to be published next week, please also tell us your name, age, where you live now and send a photo that helps illustrate your tale.
We did this last year. But we know there are more love stories out there that could have taken place only in the Golden State. And we want to share them.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.