5 Comedy Shows to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend
Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘BJORK PRESENTS: BREAD’ at Union Hall (Feb. 2, 7:30 p.m.). Natasha Vaynblat stars in this two-pronged comedic premise. Teaching the audience everything she knows and loves about carb-laden loaves, Vaynblat, a participant in Comedy Central’s Digital Creators Program, will impersonate the Icelandic singer Bjork. In between, she’ll welcome performances from Katie Hartman, Girls With Brown Hair and others.
718-638-4400, unionhallny.com
‘HÄUS PARTY’ at the Bell House (Jan. 31, 8 p.m.). This showcase, hosted by Zach Teague and Drew Lausch, celebrates its first anniversary with comedians, drag queens and surprise guests. Announced performers include Benito Skinner, Mary Beth Barone, Meg Stalter, Sydnee Washington, Marie Faustin, Drew Anderson, Marti Gould Cummings and Dusty Ray Bottoms. D.J. Harkness Granger spins at the post-comedy dance party.
718-643-6510, thebellhouseny.com
ROSS MATHEWS at Gramercy Theater (Feb. 4, 8 p.m.). Mathews has come a long way since first appearing on “The Tonight Show With Jay Leno” as Ross the Intern. Nowadays, Mathews keeps busy as a judge on “RuPaul’s Drag Race,” a talk show co-host and correspondent for E! and the host of the weekly podcast “Straight Talk With Ross Mathews.” He opens 2020 by dishing about everyone and everything on the tour for his new book, “Name Drop.”
mercuryeastpresents.com/thegramercytheatre
[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]
MODEL MAJORITY at the Peoples Improv Theater (Feb. 1, 8 p.m.). Ring in the Lunar New Year with this Asian-American comedy team, whose members have appeared on New York stages as well as on TV screens (its founder, Veronica Dang, has been on “Saturday Night Live”). The troupe will present a parody of “Cats,” a fitting celebration for the Year of the Rat. Other sketches will poke fun at traditions and superstitions surrounding the holiday.
212-563-7488, thepit-nyc.com
THE PINK ROOM BURLESQUE’S 9TH ANNUAL MISS TWIN PEAKS PAGEANT at Joe’s Pub (Feb. 1, 11:30 p.m.). When is a burlesque show a comedy event? How about when the dancers compete in costume for the title of Miss Twin Peaks, in honor of the anniversary of the death of Laura Palmer, a central, though unavoidably inert, character in David Lynch’s cult TV show from the 1990s. Schäffer the Darklord will rap his original song “A David Lynch Movie,” and the night will offer the audience a chance to join in the fun.
212-967-7555, joespub.com