Pick a Card
MONDAY PUZZLE — We sometimes use the word “sparkling” when we talk about fresh and interesting fill in crossword puzzles. It’s a good adjective, but it is rarely a literal description of a particular puzzle.
Today, I can say with all confidence that this debut by the mother-and-daughter team Kathy Lowden and Tess Davison sparkles.
Some of the nontheme fill might be a bit beyond a new solver, but once you solve the theme, the rest should fall into place.
For example, if you’ve just started solving, you might not be familiar with the word GAT, which is a slang term for a pistol. But it has appeared in the New York Times Crossword 213 times, so it’s worth getting to know. It’s short for Gatling gun, which was patented in 1862 by Richard Jordan Gatling and shortened to “GAT” around 1904.
But I digress.
26A. This is one of those “words can have more than one meaning” clues. If you “zipped” through something, you TORE through it. And likewise if you “ripped” it.
34D. TIL that president Woodrow Wilson had a PH.D.
There are circles in some of the squares, so right away, we know there is some sort of meta or additional message to be found. When read from left to right and top to bottom, it’s a revealer, but we’ll come back to that.
The next thing you might notice is that the five theme clues are simply the names of months. Is this a calendar of some kind?
Ms. Lowden and Ms. Davison drop a hint at 11A, where we are told that those five theme entries are GEMs.
[We interrupt these proceedings to give a worshipful shout-out to HBO’s “The Righteous Gemstones,” a darkly funny series starring John Goodman, Danny McBride, Adam Devine and Edi Patterson. If you haven’t binged this series yet, set aside some time and watch Season 1, because Season 2 is a-coming. Warning: This is HBO, so there is NSFW language, circumstances and violence. But it is hilarious language, circumstances and violence.]
I tumbled to this at 17A, where I got RUBIES from the crossings. When I stopped to look back at the clue, it mocked me by tersely saying “JULY.”
So I thought about that for a bit, and I realized that the only connection that RUBIES have to the month of July is that they are July’s BIRTHSTONE. And if you read the letters in the circled squares, they spell out BIRTHSTONE. There is a bit of extra theme material at 22D, where the “rough” versions of the stones are still in their UNCUT form.
There are some gluey bits in the nontheme fill, but as this is a debut for Ms. Lowden and Ms. Davison and the theme layout placed considerable constraints on them, I am willing to let that pass. I hope that their subsequent efforts sparkle more in that department.
Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.
Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.
Your thoughts?