With Polls Up and Acquittal in Sight, Trump Revels in Democratic Dysfunction

WASHINGTON — When President Trump looks back on his best days in the White House, Tuesday may land near the top of the list.
With Democrats in disarray at the start of their nominating season, Mr. Trump will take the national stage to address his largest audience of the year assured of acquittal in his Senate trial and enjoying his highest public approval since taking office.
For a president impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors just seven weeks ago, he finds himself in a strikingly strong position as his re-election campaign gets underway in earnest. His State of the Union address on Tuesday night will enable him to frame the debate while his opposition not only has no clear leader but embarrassed itself with a vote-counting debacle in Iowa.
Not that he can necessarily count on any of this to last. The economy, while healthy, has slowed its growth and could take a hit from the China travel restrictions imposed to fight the coronavirus outbreak. At some point, the Democrats will anoint a nominee who could unify the party against Mr. Trump. And John R. Bolton, the former national security adviser, plans to publish a book next month that is expected to have revelations about the president’s use of his office to further his own political interests.
Mr. Trump has shown a remarkable capacity for crossing lines and creating political problems for himself just when things appear to be better for him — indeed, he placed the phone call to Ukraine’s president that got him impeached the day after testimony by the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III made clear that he was out of political jeopardy as a result of the Russia investigation.
Still, Mr. Trump could hardly restrain his delight at the Democratic dysfunction in Iowa, quickly taking to Twitter to needle the other side.
“The Democrat Caucus is an unmitigated disaster,” he tweeted on Tuesday morning as the Iowa results remained unknown. “Nothing works, just like they ran the Country. Remember the 5 Billion Dollar Obamacare Website, that should have cost 2% of that. The only person that can claim a very big victory in Iowa last night is ‘Trump.’”
But acutely aware that he must win Iowa in the fall, Mr. Trump sought not to offend the state and rejected suggestions that the breakdown in counting should cause Iowa to lose its status as the first stop in the presidential nomination process. “It is not the fault of Iowa, it is the Do Nothing Democrats fault,” he tweeted. “As long as I am President, Iowa will stay where it is. Important tradition!”
Mr. Trump was in a relaxed mood later in the day as he hosted an off-the-record lunch for television anchors before the evening speech (after barring CNN). While he said that he did not know who would win the Democratic presidential nomination, he said that Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont was “nastier and smarter” than the other candidates in the primary race. However, the president expressed surprise at how well Pete Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind., had been doing, according to people in the room.
Contrary to his past threats, Mr. Trump said he would participate in debates in the fall after all, even though he considers the Commission on Presidential Debates biased against him. He also predicted that Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York would challenge Senator Chuck Schumer in a Democratic primary and “kick his ass.”
Looking ahead to his speech on Tuesday night, Mr. Trump said that Rush Limbaugh, the conservative radio host who announced on Monday that he has advanced lung cancer, may be in the audience, and the president added that he might award the broadcaster the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
He was not looking forward to having Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who orchestrated his impeachment, sitting behind him and next to Vice President Mike Pence during the speech. “There’s one person behind me who’s going to be friendly and one who’s not going to be friendly,” he said, according to the people in the room.
Mr. Trump complained at length about Mr. Bolton, whose unpublished book confirms a central allegation of the impeachment charges by reporting that the president conditioned security aid to Ukraine on its willingness to announce political investigations of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and other Democrats.
“He turned on me,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. Bolton.
The Iowa debacle played out even as Gallup reported that Mr. Trump’s approval rating had climbed to 49 percent, its highest in that survey since his presidency began. While polls have shown that most Americans want the Senate to call witnesses, his impeachment trial is set to end Wednesday with an assured acquittal — and it is even possible, though not certain, that one or more Democratic senators vote with him.
“What other people would look at as a moment of completely political meltdown for this president, it all appears to accrue to his benefit,” said Matt Schlapp, the chairman of the American Conservative Union. “He actually looks like the adult in the room.”
Moreover, Mr. Schlapp said, the delayed count in Iowa will sow discord and suspicion within Democratic ranks. “The problem for the Democrats is it will make people think and assume the fix is in again because they don’t like who is leading,” he said.
Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina and a close Trump ally, compared the problems in Iowa with the Obama administration’s bungled start of its health care program’s website in 2013.
“Four years of planning for the Iowa Democrat caucus up in flames,” Mr. Meadows said. “It is like a florist missing Valentine’s Day or a fireworks company being ready for July 5. The last time Democrats had a failure this big was HealthCare.gov.”
Democrats acknowledged that the Iowa breakdown plays to Mr. Trump’s advantage, at least in the short term.
“A fractious, divisive and chaotic process inevitably takes focus away from Trump’s own failures, at least in the short term, and Trump obviously believes he has the opportunity to stir the pot against the Democrats in these circumstances,” said Geoff Garin, a prominent Democratic pollster. “All of this heightens the importance for Democrats to have a confident and united front as soon as possible.”
But even as he was mocking the Democrats for their debacle, though, Mr. Trump himself was coming under fire for appearing to be less than fully respectful during the playing of the national anthem during the Super Bowl.
A smartphone video posted on Instagram and published by The Miami Herald showed Mr. Trump during a Super Bowl watch party at Trump International Golf Club in West Palm Beach, Fla., near his Mar-a-Lago estate, standing and pretending to lead an orchestra while “The Star-Spangled Banner” played before the start of the game between the San Francisco 49ers and the Kansas City Chiefs. While his wife, Melania, and son Barron had their hands on their hearts, the president fidgeted, looked around and pointed at guests.
The Herald pointed out that Mr. Trump has lectured others to be respectful during the playing of the anthem, harshly criticizing black N.F.L. players who took a knee to protest racial injustice. “You have to stand, proudly, for the national anthem or you shouldn’t be playing. You shouldn’t be there. Maybe you shouldn’t be in the country,” Mr. Trump said on Fox News in 2018.
The video is the second point of criticism of the president stemming from this year’s football championship game. He was roundly ridiculed for tweeting after the game congratulating the Chiefs and “the Great State of Kansas” even though they actually play in Missouri. Mr. Trump quickly deleted the mistaken tweet and reposted it with Missouri substituted in.
The Iowa caucus meltdown provided ammunition to the president just as the re-election season gets underway. Rather than facing an emboldened Democratic candidate after a caucus win, Mr. Trump has an opening to paint the opposition party as incapable of governing.
“When will the Democrats start blaming RUSSIA, RUSSIA, RUSSIA, instead of their own incompetence for the voting disaster that just happened in the Great State of Iowa?” he tweeted, making light of Moscow’s interference in the 2016 presidential election on his behalf.
Mr. Trump’s State of the Union address will prevent the Iowa winner, once announced, from having even a single news cycle to himself or herself.
And he hopes to upstage the Democrats again next week, scheduling a campaign rally in New Hampshire on Monday night, the eve of the first primary election, thus drawing away at least some of the television airtime and newspaper space that would have gone to the candidates running against him as they seek to regain momentum from Iowa.
In the meantime, Mr. Trump and his team were trying to stir as much trouble among the Democrats as possible by stoking suspicions of nefarious machinations in Iowa meant to deprive Mr. Sanders of a victory.
“Mark my words, they are rigging this thing,” Eric Trump, one of the president’s sons, wrote on Twitter. His brother Donald Trump Jr. wrote on his own account, “Rigging ain’t easy."