Breakdown in Iowa: Oh What a Night!
To the Editor:
Re “Tensions in Iowa Over Long Delays in Caucus Tallies” (front page, Feb. 4):
The Iowa Democratic Party tried something new Monday night. Instead of simply giving the world one winner, the party wanted all of us to know who was the caucusgoers’ first pick, their second pick and, ultimately, the candidate who received the most delegates.
That process failed. Was it frustrating? Yes. Was it exhausting? Yes. Was it expensive? Yes. Are people angry? Of course. The new process failed. Is it the end of the world? Not at all.
It was human error. And after the years of lies from President Trump, admitting honest human mistakes is almost a breath of fresh air. No one is trying to cover it up, or make up some lie or give some pathetic line.
Take a deep breath and be reminded of the words of the humorist Will Rogers: “I am not a member of any organized political party. I am a Democrat.”
Lee Lumbley
Red Oak, Tex.
To the Editor:
As someone who has developed large-scale applications such as were designed for Iowa’s caucuses, I’d like to call all of the developers into a room, slap them on the head and ask, “What were you thinking?” Rule No. 1 of designing systems: “Presume It Will Go Wrong. Plan Accordingly.”
The Russians did not have to hack our systems. We did it ourselves.
Stevan Alburty
Liberty Lake, Wash.
To the Editor:
Over the years, we have been repeatedly told that Iowa voters deserve their privileged position as first in the nation because of how seriously they take the voting process. If that were ever true, the debacle of this year’s Iowa caucuses should put an end to what is fundamentally an undemocratic process that disenfranchises those who cannot devote several hours to the process of voting.
The caucus method suits a pied piper candidate like Senator Bernie Sanders who can promise free tuition, cancellation of student debt and universal health care to an army of young people who can devote an evening to a party-like event. The senator’s campaign complicated an already messy process by demanding changes to the reporting of voting tallies after his defeat in 2016.
Finally, with the choice of a poorly tested application, the local Democratic Party lost any claim to be first to vet the candidates.
Brian Gorman
Santa Barbara, Calif.
To the Editor:
The Iowa caucuses are a blessing. It was so great to be in a room of 800 Democrats working for a brighter future. All Democrats should have that experience. It is worth the wait in hearing the results. The rest of the country needs to just chill out.
Keri Hornbuckle
Iowa City
To the Editor:
The privileged status of Iowa’s caucuses leading off the presidential campaign season has long been criticized as unrepresentative of the Democratic electorate: too rural, too white, too old. But they are also inherently discriminatory against working parents, the elderly, the poor, the disabled and others who may be unable to spend a winter night at a caucus. And now we have the counting fiasco.
The Democratic Party should require primaries and do away with caucuses in Iowa and elsewhere.
Steve Nelson
Washington, Mass.
To the Editor:
People were outraged about the fact that the media could not report the outcome of the Iowa caucuses Monday night. The campaigns, too, were angry that their candidates were denied the ability to make prime-time speeches in which they could spin their outcomes in a way that would portray victories of some kind.
But the caucuses were choosing delegates to a convention that is scheduled for mid-July. Why does it matter that the results will be known only on Tuesday rather than Monday night? Why is it better to be able to report, breathlessly, on one-precinct-at-a-time results as they dribble in, and to speculate on what they imply for the state as a whole, than to have the final statewide outcomes all at the same time, with the same details available?
Paul Alan Levy
Washington
To the Editor:
Bring back the smoke-filled room!
Thomas Deutsch
Hartsdale, N.Y.