Zoë Harris, Simon Lazarre-Bloom
Zoë Kimberly Harris and Simon Lazarre-Bloom were married Dec. 30 at San Francisco City Hall. Douglas H. White, a New York City deputy fire commissioner and the groom’s uncle, officiated, having become a Universal Life minister for this event.
Dr. Lazarre, 37, is the director for strategy and business operations on the team that manages customer engagement at Genentech, the biotechnology company in South San Francisco, Calif. She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, received a master’s degree in public health from Yale and received a doctoral degree in health services and policy analysis from the University of California, Berkeley. She is also a member of the executive committee of the San Francisco AIDS Foundation.
She is the daughter of Johanna Harris and Dr. Jeffrey E. Harris of Los Angeles. The bride’s father is an internist at Eisner Health, a community clinic in Los Angeles, and is also a professor of economics at the M.I.T. Her mother, a lawyer, is a mediator in private practice in Los Angeles, and she is the board vice president at Westside Infant-Family Network, an organization in Los Angeles that provides in-home mental health and other social services to families.
Mr. Lazarre-Bloom, 42, is an enterprise account executive in San Francisco for Pluralsight, a technology skills platform. He graduated from the University of California, Davis.
He is the son of Emily F. Lazarre and Emanuel C. Bloom of Berkeley. The groom’s mother is an artist whose work was in a show in September at the Dzine Gallery in San Francisco, and was also presented in April in the gallery at the Kentfield, Calif., campus of the College of Marin, from which she retired as a professor of drawing and sculpture. The groom’s father retired as a founder of Tantes Catering in Oakland, Calif.
The bride first spotted the groom at the party of mutual friends in 2015, in San Francisco. But they didn’t connect until a year later, when he tried and failed to contact her through the dating app Hinge, and instead sent her a note through Facebook. Though the message may have seemed random, the bride said, “I knew exactly who he was.”