What’s Going On in This Graph? | Internet Privacy Policies
This graph, which shows the reading level and time (in minutes) required to read internet privacy policies for 150 popular websites and apps plus a few books, appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
After looking closely at the graph above (or at this full-size image), think about these three questions:
The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order. Start with “I notice,” then “I wonder,” and end with a catchy headline.
2. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment online. Teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students’ comments.)
3. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
On Wednesday, Jan. 8, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, Jan. 9, we will reveal more information about the graph at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graph differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
Privacy policies describe data that sites collect from users and how that data is used. Our graph, which relates reading level and time, is from the article “Privacy Policies Are a Mess.” The New York Times privacy policy takes more than 20 minutes to read and has a readability score of about 1400 (high college level). Even more extreme, there are popular websites and apps on our graph that have a post-college readability level and require as much as 35 minutes to read. The most demanding policy is for Airbnb, a website with 260 million users who are looking for short-term housing rentals like vacation rooms. We value our privacy and are reluctant to have our data freely shared, but do these complex policies really protect us? Do we just check off “I agree.” so we can read the New York Times or book a vacation rental?
People worry about the risks associated with sharing their personal data, given that it can be used to track their activities or even be sold to others. There are also benefits of data sharing, including a more connected world, developing products and services that better meet our needs, and even identifying public health threats and terrorists. Given that there are both costs and benefits of relinquishing some of our privacy when using the internet, maybe we should focus on how to make privacy policies more understandable. The data in this graph helps us understand how privacy policies differ.
Here are some of the headlines you shared online that really capture the meaning of this graph: “Reasons Why We Always Skip the Terms of Service” by Colin and Mike of Ithaca High School, New York, “Why Nobody Reads App Policies” by Ryan of Hyde Park Middle School, MS, “Can’t You Understand? Privacy Rules!” by Owl of Washington State, and “Privacy Policies: Who Reads Them Anyway?” by Grace of Academy of Saint Elizabeth, Morristown, New Jersey.
You may want to think critically about these questions.
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graph.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going on in This Graph?” which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data.
Keep noticing and wondering. We continue to welcome your responses.
Join us Wednesday, Jan. 15 to notice and wonder about the changing bird population in the United States and Canada. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern Time during the live online moderation.
________
Stat Nuggets for “Privacy Policies Are a Mess”
To see all previously published Stat Nuggets with links to their graphs, go to this index.
SCATTERPLOT
A scatterplot is a graph that is used to display the relationship between two quantitative variables and is described by the direction, strength and form of the relationship, and unusual observations.
In the internet privacy policy graph, the quantitative variables are the time (in minutes) required to read a policy and the readability score as determined using Lexile. The relationship between these two variables is positive and very weak. It is not surprising that policies that are more difficult to read take longer to read. A privacy policy that is unusual compared to the others is from the BBC, which takes about 13 minutes to read and has a readability score of about 1000 (tenth grade).
_________
The graph for “What’s Going on in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Roxy Peck, professor emerita, California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo, and moderates online with Heather Johnson, an associate professor of mathematics education at the University of Colorado Denver.