When Dinosaurs Left Tracks in a Land Consumed by Lava and Fire
Two years ago, Emese M. Bordy, a sedimentologist at the University of Cape Town, was flipping through an obscure dissertation from the 1960s when a clue leapt out at her. It was an image of a footprint on a farm located on the northern Karoo Basin of South Africa.
The Karoo region contains huge volcanic flood basalts that chronicle the final epoch of the ancient supercontinent Gondwana before it broke apart about 180 million years ago during a period of tectonic and volcanic catastrophe. Geologists have been studying it for decades to understand this major change in the layout of Earth’s landmasses, which coincided with a mass extinction event.
But the image suggested to Dr. Bordy that there was more to learn about the prehistoric animals that had lived on that dying supercontinent. That initial hunch sparked something like a paleontological detective tale.
First, Dr. Bordy and her colleagues were able to track down the farm’s owner with the help of a local historian. He gave her team permission to hunt for fossils on his property. There, the team not only found the pictured footprint, but also discovered two dozen other prints left 183 million years ago by carnivorous and herbivorous dinosaurs, as well as small creatures called synapsids.
“These tracks are special to me because they really allowed me to enjoy that incredible feeling of discovery twice, once while reading the old literature and then again in the field,” Dr. Bordy said.
The prints, which the team reported Wednesday in the journal PLOS ONE, are preserved in sandstone positioned between layers of basalt, the remains of lava flows, which indicates that the animals walked through this area after the eruptions began. Their tracks were preserved in the bed of a fast-running seasonal stream that may have offered reprieve from this “land of fire,” as the study calls it.
Though it’s not possible to speculate how close these animals would have been to lava flows or the fires they ignited, it is clear that a lot of the region would have already been buried and burning when the tracks were laid.
“These volcanic eruptions were mind-bogglingly voluminous,” Dr. Bordy said, noting that basalt piles in southern Africa can be a mile thick — and that’s after more than 100 million years of erosion and weathering. Sandstone layers of the Karoo Basin are more commonly buried beneath these huge basalt piles, which shows “that eventually the land surface was overwhelmed by the lava flows.”
The smallest tracks measure just under one inch, and are tentatively identified as four-legged synapsids, a lineage of animals that eventually gave rise to modern mammals. At the other end of the size spectrum are 5 and ½-inch tracks made by feet with three toes, suggesting that bipedal meat-eating dinosaurs such as Coelophysis walked through this volatile landscape.
The team also reports the discovery of a new ichnospecies, the term for a species identified by trace fossils such as tracks, which the researchers named Afrodelatorrichnus ellenbergeri. These animals left 1 and ½-inch footprints with three toes, and were small quadrupedal herbivores that belonged to the ornithischian clade of dinosaurs, a group that includes much bigger superstars like Stegosaurus and Triceratops.
The track makers were some of the last creatures to trek through this ephemeral landscape before it was incinerated by lava, likely within a single season.
“Despite the eruptions and harsh climate, this area maintained a diversity of animals, at least during part of the eruptive phase,” said Steve Brusatte, a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh who was not involved in the study.
“There’s also something striking about dinosaurs and early mammal relatives surviving together in this dangerous landscape,” Dr. Brusatte added. “Dinosaur tracks usually get most of the attention, but I think it’s remarkable to think that we had mammal ancestors that had to endure volcanic eruptions, asteroid impacts and other environmental changes in the deep past, and if they didn’t, we wouldn’t be here today.”
The discovery demonstrates that South African basalts could be packed with untapped insights about survival during a period of global ecological distress, the likes of which have never been experienced in human history. It could also help scientists anticipate what might happen if we are unfortunate enough to be rocked by another bout of massive volcanic activity, or disasters on a similar scale.
“We would like to get a more complete picture of what was happening in this part of Gondwana at that time,” Dr. Bordy said. “Not only for lessons on the deep past, but for lessons for our future.”