‘Uncut Gems’ Shines at Box Office, Just in Time for Oscar Voting
LOS ANGELES — Adam Sandler’s “Uncut Gems” is sparkling at the box office.
Once again, the top movies in North American theaters were family-oriented holiday leftovers, including first-place “Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker” (Disney), which collected roughly $34 million over the weekend, for a new domestic total of $451 million ($919 million worldwide). Second-place “Jumanji: The Next Level” (Sony) took in about $26.5 million, lifting its domestic total to $236 million ($610 million).
But in Hollywood, where initial Oscar voting was in full swing over the weekend, minds were more attuned to the performance of prestige films — starting with the R-rated “Uncut Gems,” which has developed into a runaway hit, at least for a divisive movie that cost less than $20 million to make. “Uncut Gems,” directed by Josh and Benny Safdie and starring Sandler as an abrasive jeweler and gambling addict, sold $7.8 million in tickets, for a total of about $37 million since its wide release on Dec. 25.
[Read our “Uncut Gems” review.]
To compare, Fox Searchlight’s PG-13-rated Nazi satire, “Jojo Rabbit,” has collected $21.6 million since arriving in theaters in early November. Another Oscar hopeful, the R-rated “Bombshell” (Lionsgate), starring Charlize Theron, Nicole Kidman and Margot Robbie, has taken in about $24.6 million since it was released on Dec. 20. Several other awards-oriented films, including “The Two Popes” and “Marriage Story,” both from Netflix, have largely bypassed theaters and played on television sets and mobile devices.
Greta Gerwig’s rapturously reviewed “Little Women” (Sony), which cost about $40 million to make, has also exceeded expectations. It has collected a stout $60 million since arriving on Christmas Day, including $13.6 million over the weekend, enough for third place.
But the stronger-than-expected performance of “Uncut Gems” has been particularly surprising, analysts said, because it polarized audiences: Critics raved, but ticket buyers gave Sandler’s film a C-plus grade in CinemaScore exit polls (the same grade as the much-maligned “Cats”). Paul Dergarabedian, a senior Comscore analyst, said ticket sales for “Uncut Gems” were “a testament to the power of an original and exhilarating movie with an unexpected performance from an iconic comedy star.”
“Uncut Gems,” which counts Scott Rudin as a producer and Martin Scorsese as an executive producer, is on pace to generate roughly $55 million in ticket sales in the United States alone, analysts said on Sunday. (Netflix has “Uncut Gem” rights in Canada.) A total in that range would give A24 the biggest hit in its seven-year history; “Lady Bird” (2018) holds the record, with $49 million in domestic ticket sales.
The only new movie to arrive in wide release over the weekend was “The Grudge” (Sony), a low-budget effort to squeeze a fourth film out of this faded horror franchise. It collected about $11.3 million, according to Comscore. Ticket buyers gave the R-rated movie a rare F grade in CinemaScore exit polls.