The Macabre, the Sinister, the Absurd: Story Time Just Got Weirder
ADULTS AND OTHER CHILDREN
Stories
By Miriam Cohen
238 pp. Ig Publishing. Paper, $16.95.
The 14 linked stories in “Adults and Other Children” track the same four women at different points in their lives. It’s more disconcerting than you might expect to re-encounter as an adult a character you’ve previously met in her childhood. But unlike in a classic bildungsroman, here, much of the story line in between is missing; the result is curious, sometimes very dark — and often delightful.
Cohen’s greatest strength is in her realism (I had little patience for the first and most fantastical story, “Naughty,” with its imaginary nanny, her petticoat made of children’s bones, her myths of changelings). In another break from the coming-of-age archetype, her characters — both the children and, especially, the adults — are distinctly unsympathetic: immature, perverted, selfish. No detail is spared in casting them as unappealing: particularly their incessant lies, which span the book.
Behind the characters’ transgressions is an acute portrayal of failed relationships and communication, of what is expected of women and how they struggle to transcend the norms that require them to achieve certain things (a husband, first and foremost) in order to be relevant. In “Expecting,” a school principal tells an unwed teacher that as a single mother, she would set the wrong example. Pretending, as a result, to be “married and pregnant, she was intoxicating to be around. Her students gazed up at her during her lessons, pupils enlarged, as though stumbling from darkened rooms.”
In “A Girl of a Certain Age,” two roommates compose a macabre musical inspired by the domestic murder of one of the women’s co-workers, and also “S.V.U.” They are fearlessly un-P.C.; one song is called “Girls Just Wanna Get Raped.” In “Odd Goods,” one of these roommates is now a lit professor (on her curriculum: “Lolita”). She makes an unwelcome pass at a male student, before fielding a similar attempt from her department chair one evening at her home, but “he let himself out before it occurred to her she could’ve asked him to leave.” When she recounts the story to her dean, major details have been altered: “It wasn’t her hand that he held, but her breast. And she had to ask him to stop.” It’s an unsettling sequence of events one can read equally as either proof of or counterpoint to the dictum “Believe All Women.”
IMAGINARY MUSEUMS
Stories
By Nicolette Polek
114 pp. Soft Skull. Paper, $15.95.
The longest story in “Imaginary Museums” is no more than a few pages. This form can be provocative (think Amy Hempel, Diane Williams), but every single one of the words must glitter. Unfortunately, some of Polek’s fall flat, seemingly selected with the primary goal of arbitrariness.
Luckily, she has a keen eye for the absurd. In one of the most effective stories, “Winners,” a group of scholars gathers for drinks, and one refers to Ezra Pound as a “she.” No one thinks to correct it; instead the others feel ashamed for having thought Pound was a man. While complimenting one another on how “intelligent and qualified” they all are, the group proceeds to exchange ludicrous anecdotes about Pound, the woman.
The book’s dislocations are physical as well as theoretical. In “Sabbatical,” a comically demanding homeowner hands over his house to a new tenant (“I was wondering … if you climb around there and find a knife with a thin jade handle … could you dispose of it, under the oak tree? That is where I bury all the things that need burying”). We experience the renter’s sense of displacement among the nearby abandoned auto yard, the colony of lizards, the slab of plywood where there ought to be a door lock. The location of his sabbatical, Chernobyl, sounds joltingly foreign on the heels of Polek’s previous, suburban-set section titled “American Interiors.”
If she’s going for the uncanny, then some of her many, brief plots are too flimsy, not grounded enough in the recognizable, to succeed. A seamstress suddenly “decides to give up people,” making clothes instead for mannequins, a car, a teakettle. There’s no more to the story, and it’s too bad: Given more space, it could’ve been almost charming.
Polek’s imagery, though, comes through like flashes in a silent film. In one memorably vivid scene, a landlord shows a couple a video of herself as a child, smashing strawberries into sheep’s wool. Another narrator’s grandfather falls in love at 26 with a woman who loves flowers; one day he sneaks into her house to water all her plants. But he doesn’t stop there, watering her quilt, her phone and her carpet. This may seem destructive, or cruel, but in Polek’s world, it feels more like beauty.
SHOW THEM A GOOD TIME
By Nicole Flattery
238 pp. Bloomsbury. $24.
Like Cohen’s collection, Flattery’s “Show Them a Good Time” is populated with unlikable women, or at least ones with gaping, gnawing flaws, ones who live and observe their lives in off-kilter ways.
Flattery’s writing is like a fever dream; the details are lucid, but the basics (place, time) are disorientingly hazy. Perhaps this rootlessness is intentional; what she seems to care most about is talk — what it can and can’t do, how it can hurt, how it can be the source of regret. In “Hump,” a woman recalls her dead father’s final regret: that he didn’t talk more. “He surmised, through a mouthful of diabetic chocolate, that he had only spoke 30 percent of his life. It was a dismal percentage.”
Many of Flattery’s protagonists have endured some sort of trauma, but the events are so buried we feel we’re getting only their bitter remains, and we’re unsure if those remains are strength, or apathy. In the title story, a woman remembers her abuse as a cliché: “Usually when he was halfway through hitting me it would occur to him just how obvious he was.”
As though in flat rejection of the victim narrative, Flattery’s women can be spectacularly mean. In “Track,” a woman with a famous comedian boyfriend starts to leave nasty comments on his fan page, using his dead mother’s name as a pseudonym. Like other characters in this collection, she’s desperate to communicate directly; she just doesn’t know how. So she prints out the meanest post and puts it in her boyfriend’s coat pocket.
The cruelty in the worlds Flattery draws makes the tender moments in her stories all the more affecting. In “You’re Going to Forget Me Before I Forget You,” two sisters have a series of phone conversations, about the narrator’s children’s-book writing, about her sister’s pregnancy. They almost always speak at night, the narrator back in her hotel room, on book tour. There’s a gloominess to this story that comes from lingering childhood trauma, but also a neediness, and a romance: At one point the pregnant sister begs her to blow cigarette smoke to her through the phone. In between these dialogues, the narrator thinks about the past, glances back at the pains of the sisters’ young lives, even calls an ex. “Would you forget me if you could?” she asks him. “No,” he says. “I wouldn’t.”