$250,000 Homes in Vermont, Minnesota and Pennsylvania
This property is in Lincoln Park, a neighborhood of Victorians and Craftsman-style homes that was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1995. It is about a mile southwest of downtown and the same distance northwest of Minnesota State University, Mankato. (Gustavus Adolphus College in the city of St. Peter is 13 miles north; Minneapolis is 80 miles northeast.) The childhood home of Maud Hart Lovelace, the author of the Betsy-Tacy children’s book series introduced in the 1940s, is three blocks away.
Size: 2,241 square feet
Price per square foot: $114
Indoors: A covered entrance porch is lined in casement windows topped with colorful leaded-glass panes. The front door opens to a wallpapered foyer trimmed in oak.
French doors lead to a living room with oak floors and large windows. A matching set of doors connects to a formal dining with the same features, as well as a window seat and a built-in shelf.
The updated kitchen is wrapped in white cabinets and has a gleaming tin ceiling that matches the stainless steel appliances. The countertops and backsplash are ceramic tile.
Beyond the kitchen is an enclosed back porch with a clay-tile floor. There is also a renovated half bathroom.
Three second-floor bedrooms share a new bathroom with a combined tub and shower and extensive built-ins. A walk-up attic has an A-shaped finished room and additional storage under the eaves. The basement includes a laundry area and a workshop.
Outdoor space: A large, low-maintenance deck is next to the back porch. The yard is fenced and includes a paved, circular patio with a firepit. Parking is in a detached three-car garage.
Taxes: $2,052
Contact: Jen True, True Real Estate, 507-317-6259; truerealestatemankato.com
This house is in southwestern Vermont, three hours northwest of Boston and slightly farther northeast of New York City. Albany International Airport is about an hour southwest. The property is on Monument Avenue, named for the 306-foot-tall Bennington Battle Monument a mile north, near the Old First Church, where the poet Robert Frost is buried, and the historic center of town. Southwestern Vermont Medical Center is behind the home. The Long Trail and Appalachian Trail run just a few miles away, and both Alpine and Nordic skiing are nearby.
Size: 1,308 square feet
Price per square foot: $191
Indoors: Turning right from the front door takes you into a living room with hardwood floors, six-over-six sash windows and a wide, wood-burning fireplace. Drawers and bookshelves are built into a wall around the corner, leading into the kitchen.
Turn left at the front door, and you find a dining room. The kitchen, which connects to that room, is long, with red linoleum floors and white-painted hardwood cabinets with their original latches. At the end are a half bathroom and a mudroom.
The three bedrooms are on the second floor and share a hall bathroom with an original sink, new linoleum flooring and a combined tub and shower; the two bedrooms at the front of the house have dormer windows. There is also a windowed reading nook on the landing.
Outdoor space: The basement and living room walk out to a double-decker porch overlooking the level backyard. This large, grassy patch is studded with several apple trees that remain from the time the property served as an apple orchard for the Everett Mansion at Southern Vermont College.
Taxes: $4,745
Contact: Faith Rhodes, Rhodes Real Estate, 802-379-3976; rhodesrealestatevt.com
This property is in the Hampden Heights neighborhood of Reading, a city of 88,500, 90 minutes northeast of Philadelphia. It is across the street from the ball field of Albright College, and a half-mile from the Mount Penn Preserve. The downtown business district is three miles southwest, and from there it’s just a hop across the Schuylkill River to the borough of West Reading, which has new restaurants, shops and breweries, as well as a farmers’ market, museum and Reading Hospital.
Size: 2,010 square feet
Price per square foot: $129
Indoors: Arches on either side of the foyer lead to a living room on one side and a combined dining room and kitchen on the other. The living room has hardwood floors, traditional molding, a wood-burning fireplace and access to a screened porch. The dining room includes a pair of built-in corner cabinets that rise almost to the ceiling.
On the other side of a breakfast bar is the updated kitchen, which has granite countertops, radiant-heated floors and stainless steel appliances. There is a half bathroom near the kitchen, and a second fireplace (gas-burning) is in the wood-paneled den on the main floor. A third fireplace (also gas-burning) is in a basement family room.
A curving staircase takes you to the second floor, where there is a window seat built into the landing, three bedrooms with hardwood floors and two full bathrooms, including the recently renovated master bath. (It has a glass walk-in shower and a heated basket-weave-tile floor.)
The exterior of the house and several rooms were repainted in the last few years.
Outdoor space: Lawn, shrubbery and mature trees surround the house. One of the guest bedrooms has access to a patio. Parking is in an attached one-car garage, with room for two additional vehicles in the driveway.
Taxes: $4,985
Contact: Katie Broskey, Keller Williams Platinum Realty, 717-580-4129; kwplatinumrealty.com