STEM Writing Contest: Explain a Concept in a Clear, Engaging Way
Update May 7: Winners have been announced!
Why should we eat less sugar? How do you find fossils? Why are many facial-recognition systems biased? What does it look like when an asteroid gets destroyed? How will rising seas affect cities around the world by 2050? Why is vaping such an addictive part of life for many students? How can architects build beautiful things in the world’s harshest environment? And what, exactly, is all that screen time doing to kids’ brains?
If you click on any of these articles, you’ll see that they are written for a general reader. Special technical or scientific knowledge is not required, and each is designed to get our attention and keep it — by giving us “news we can use” in our own lives, or by exploring something fascinating in a way that makes it easy to understand and shows us why it matters.
That’s what Times journalists do every day across our Science, Health and Technology sections, and it’s what Science News and Science News for Students do on their sites too, where journalists explain things like meteor showers, the science of ghosts and how sleep may affect test scores.
For this contest, The Learning Network and Science News together invite you to bring that same spirit of inquiry and discovery to finding a STEM-related question, concept or issue you’re interested in, and, in 500 words or fewer, explaining it to a general audience in a way that not only helps us understand, but also engages us and makes us see why it’s important.
So what questions do you have about how the world works? What science, technology, engineering, math or health questions might be inspired by your own life or experiences? What innovations, processes or problems in any of these areas puzzle or intrigue you? What concepts in STEM — whether from biology, physics, psychology, computer science, algebra or calculus — have you learned about, in or out of school, that might be useful or fun to explain to others?
The best of this kind of writing includes three elements we’ll be asking you to include, too:
This contest is the culminating project in our Informational Writing Unit, the fourth unit of our yearlong writing curriculum. As part of the unit, we have additional resources to support teachers and students. These include:
As is true for all our contests, the first year is a bit of an experiment. We expect and welcome your questions, and will immediately update our rules or guidelines if they are unclear. Please contact us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com.
We have changed our contest submission process to be better aligned with internet privacy laws around the world.
Students ages 16-19 can submit their own entries using our Student Submission Form, if they want.
Teachers can use our Teacher Submission Form to submit entries on behalf of students ages 13-19. The form allows teachers to submit multiple entries simultaneously.
Note: If you have already registered for a previous contest, you’ll need to log into the contest system using your email address and password.
1. Choose a STEM topic you care about.
Maybe it’s something personal — you just found out you’re nearsighted and you want to know what that means, or you want to learn about the brain and how to create more efficient study habits.
Or, maybe it’s something cool you observed in science lab that you’d like to explain, or a phenomenon you’ve noticed in your own neighborhood, school or backyard that you’d like to investigate. It could be a topic you already know a great deal about and want to explain to others, or something you’ve never thought about until now.
Please choose something you are genuinely curious about. We’ve been running student writing contests for over a decade, and one thing we know for sure is that the best writing is inspired by students’ real interests, not from a one-size-fits-all assignment given to an entire class.
2. Make sure your topic is narrow enough that you can cover it well in 500 words or fewer.
You probably can’t explain the entire circulatory system within our word limit, but you probably can explain why the heart keeps beating. You probably can’t get across all the thinking and research on the science of happiness, but you probably can choose one research-backed recommendation and explore it.
3. Do research, and cite your sources.
For this contest, we are partnering with Science News. At least one of your sources must be from either The New York Times, Science News OR its sister site, Science News for Students. But of course you can use all three, and any other additional sources.
We provide you with a separate field to make a list of sources you used to write your article or essay. You can format your list however you want; we will not judge your entry based on formatting in this section. And, internal citations are not necessary.
We also encourage you to interview experts whose work is relevant to your chosen topic. But that doesn’t mean you have to call the head of the U.S. Forest Service if you want to write about butterfly habitats. You can talk to a local park ranger or gardener who has experience with and extensive knowledge about the topic.
And, of course, part of your research can be your own investigations. Let’s say you’re writing about teenagers’ use of e-books. You might survey your own class or grade about their habits and preferences, then use those findings in your piece.
When you click on the submission form, there is an optional field to explain more about your process. This is a new contest for us, and we’d love some insight into how you decided what to write about, as well as how you researched and composed.
4. But be very careful to put quotations around any direct quotes you use, and to cite the source of anything you paraphrase.
If we put a sentence from your submission into a search engine, we don’t want to find it anywhere else — unless you’re clearly quoting or citing that source.
5. You have only 500 words, so make them all count.
Our coming Mentor Text series will give you examples of what good STEM-related writing looks like. Stay tuned because we’ll link to them here.
6. Here is the rubric that shows exactly what we’re looking for.
7. Update: Please submit only one entry per student.
_________
1. Students who are ages 13-19 from anywhere in the world can participate.
This contest is intended for high school students, but middle school students who meet the minimum age requirement can also participate. (Because the term “high school” means different things in different places, age is the primary eligibility requirement.)
Further, to respond to new national and international privacy laws, we now offer two ways to submit work:
4. The children and stepchildren of New York Times employees and Society for Science & the Public are NOT eligible to enter this contest.
Nor are teenagers who live in the same household as those employees.
5. The deadline for this contest is Tuesday, March 3, 2020, at 11:59 p.m. Eastern time.
We provide a small window of time after that deadline to allow for technical difficulties. However, at some point after the deadline, our contest submission form closes and you will not be allowed to submit an entry, so please be mindful of the deadline and submit early.
_________
1. What is the “prize”?
Having your work published on The New York Times Learning Network.
2. What if I need to prove to my teacher that I entered this contest?
Within an hour of submitting your editorial, you should receive an email from The New York Times Learning Network with the subject heading “Thank you for your submission to our STEM Writing Contest.” If you don’t receive the email within an hour, even after checking your spam folder, then you can resubmit your entry.
If, after two attempts and waiting over one full day, you still have not received a confirmation email, you can contact us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com with the email address you used in the contest form. Use the subject heading “Please send me an email confirmation for my STEM Writing Contest submission.” Be sure to include your name in your email. You may have to wait up to a week for a reply.
_________
This contest is a collaboration with the Society for Science & the Public, publisher of Science News, a source of independent nonprofit journalism on the latest in science, medicine and technology since 1921, Science News for Students and the Science News in High Schools program.