Gibney Receives Grant to Transform Into a Repertory Company
The choreographer and entrepreneur Gina Gibney announced on Wednesday that her dance company is the recipient of a $2 million gift, which is to be used for its reinvention as a commission-based repertory group. The money, which comes from Andrew A. Davis, a trustee of the Shelby Cullom Davis Charitable Fund, makes it possible for her company to double in size, to 12 dancers from six. Gibney Company, formerly Gibney Dance Company, will make its official debut at the Joyce Theater in November 2021.
Ms. Gibney, who formed her contemporary dance company in 1991 and runs two dance spaces in New York, called the financial gift transformational. She said she saw an urgent need “for a large-scale, artistically excellent, uncompromising repertory company in New York,” she said, adding: “Why do dancers leave New York City to perform in other companies? There’s such an opportunity to create something big.”
Ms. Gibney, who leads Gibney Company as its artistic director, said she was inspired by troupes like Nederlands Dans Theater and Ballet BC in Canada, repertory groups that she views as having outstanding dancers and world-class repertory. (Amy Miller and Nigel Campbell, members of Ms. Gibney’s current group, will serve as directors of the new company.)
Mr. Davis, who cited the Gibney organization’s strength in “creating and sustaining a viable, forward-looking model for dance,” said in a statement: “The stage is set for them to establish a wholly new paradigm for a contemporary dance company.”
The last major contemporary repertory company in New York not grounded in the aesthetic of a founding choreographer was Cedar Lake Contemporary Ballet, which folded in 2015.
As the founder, artistic director and chief executive of Gibney, a dance organization that has studios and performance spaces in two buildings on lower Broadway, Ms. Gibney sees the venture as feasible because it builds on a structure already in place.
“We’re not building a building in order to have a dance company,” she said. “We have space, we have staff, we have a Xerox machine, we have resources. We’ve created an ecosystem. I’m not looking to add another legacy-based repertory company to the mix. I’m really looking to build a source of pride for New York City.”