What Should We Cover in 2020?
Good morning.
(If you don’t already get California Today by email, here’s the sign-up.)
Well, at long last, it’s Friday, the end of what has felt like a monthslong first week of 2020.
For me, the past year — my first as your California Today correspondent — has been a whirlwind, getting reacquainted with my home state. In part, that’s meant diving headfirst into big, intractable problems and major breaking news.
But one of my favorite things about writing this newsletter each day has been exploring all the other stories of the state, and sharing them with you.
After growing up knowing his face, I finally talked with James Saito, a Japanese-American actor, about Asian representation onscreen. I went to see the Super Bloom in the desert, and I wrote about what it took to catch a glimpse of Lori Loughlin in court. I learned about how reviving indigenous food practices could help fight hunger in the Klamath River Basin.
A professor told me about how a deadly explosion in the Bay Area during World War II set off a chain of events that would push the military to desegregate, and a bar owner told me about the nuances of efforts to preserve San Francisco’s L.G.B.T.Q. spaces. I looked at Smokey Bear’s legacy on his 75th birthday and raided a trove of old ads to mark the occasion.
With your help, we made a California playlist on Spotify, and I got to talk about it in real life with an inveterate New Yorker, Jon Pareles (who is also The Times’s chief pop music critic).
I mention all this because, now, we want to check in with you: What do you want to know more about in the coming year? What kinds of stories do you like reading? Are there issues, places or communities you’d like to see covered in California Today?
Let us know at CAToday@nytimes.com.
Better yet, if you know about something you think other people should know about too, send us a tip.
And thank you, again, for reading and sharing with us. We appreciate it.
We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.
Why it matters: Mr. Garcetti, who considered running himself, was heavily courted by the candidates looking for a high-profile boost in California. And as my colleague Jonathan Martin noted on Twitter, Senator Bernie Sanders is counting on the Golden State, where he has campaigned heavily. And Michael Bloomberg has been looking for support among his fellow mayors.
Also: Here’s a conversation with Mr. Steyer, who was the only Californian onstage in the last debate. [The New York Times]
Read more about why California’s population growth has stalled. [The New York Times]
If you grew up in Orange County, you probably knew someone who worked at Disneyland in some capacity. And you know that those “cast members” are keepers of critical wisdom: They can tell you, often in exacting detail, how to milk your ticket for all it’s worth. (A lot.)
It’s easy to forget, then, that millions of people flock to the park every year, and many of them are flying blind, but for the internet.
That’s where the Disney Parks Moms Panel comes in, Disney told my colleague Tariro Mzezewa.
It’s essentially a Disney-sponsored Quora for Disney trip planners — often mothers who, like the panelists, aren’t paid for their work.
Still, as Tariro reported, 10,000 superfans applied for one of the 14 panelist jobs. And they are compensated with free trips.
Read more here.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.