Johnson and BBC Trade Jabs, as War on the Press Flares
LONDON — When Prime Minister Boris Johnson delivered a fireside chat last week to mark Britain’s departure from the European Union, he did not ask the BBC to tape it, preferring to use an in-house video crew. The BBC, in turn, refused to air his remarks on that history-making evening.
It was a telling bit of tit-for-tat in the feud between the prime minister and Britain’s public broadcaster — one that has run the gamut from petty snubs, like the boycott of a popular BBC radio show by Mr. Johnson’s ministers, to real economic threats, like a proposal to stop prosecuting people for failing to pay the compulsory license fee that funds the BBC’s operations.
And it comes against a backdrop of deepening hostility between Mr. Johnson, a one-time journalist, and the British press corps, including journalists from newspapers that backed his Brexit campaign.
The rancor has inevitably drawn comparisons to President Trump’s clashes with the White House news media. But Mr. Johnson has avoided Mr. Trump’s inflammatory language, and the primary target of his wrath, the BBC, is a revered institution that occupies a place in Britain unlike the president’s favorite targets, CNN or MSNBC.
On Monday, reporters from the BBC, the Financial Times, the Guardian and other news outlets walked out of a briefing at 10 Downing Street to protest a move by Mr. Johnson’s communications staff to bar several of their colleagues from attending the session, which was on trade talks with Brussels.
“This paper is an avid supporter of all he is trying to achieve,” said an editorial comment in the Daily Mail, whose reporter joined the walkout. “But we cannot be an uncritical friend. Freezing out journalists because they don’t agree with him makes a mockery of his message of openness.”
For now, the blowback has forced Mr. Johnson to take a more conciliatory tone. “I am a journalist,” Mr. Johnson, who once edited the weekly magazine, the Spectator, said on Wednesday. “I love journalism.”
Yet, a few hours earlier, his government announced it would introduce a proposal to stop prosecuting people for failing to pay the license fee for the BBC. Officials argue that nonpayment of other such fees is handled in civil, not criminal, proceedings.
They say it is a relic in an era of streaming and subscription TV services, like Netflix and YouTube, that consumers can take or leave as they wish. And the penalty falls disproportionately on older people, who are less able to afford the fee, which is currently £154 ($200) a year.
“Quite simply, the world in which the BBC was created, and the license fee was established, has changed beyond recognition,” said Nicky Morgan, Mr. Johnson’s secretary of state for digital, culture, media and sport.
But critics accuse the government of using funding as a weapon to punish the BBC for news coverage it dislikes. The debate over the BBC’s license fee flares regularly, these people say, usually after a new Conservative government takes office and sets about settling scores from the campaign just ended.
The last time the government considered “decriminalizing” the license fee, in 2015 under Prime Minister David Cameron, an independent review estimated it would cost the BBC £200 million a year, around $260 million. Analysts now estimate the cost at between £350 million and £400 million a year, about $450 million to $520 million. That is roughly 10 percent of the BBC’s budget and would force draconian cuts in staff and programming. Any changes would not take effect until April 2022.
“The BBC is the equivalent of BP staring at the Gulf of Mexico before the blowout of its oil rig,” said Claire Enders, a London-based media analyst, referring to the environmental calamity that ultimately cost the British oil company more than $60 billion.
Last month, the BBC announced it would cut about 450 jobs in its news division to prepare for leaner times. That prompted the departure of Sarah Sands, the editor of the Today program on BBC radio, which has been boycotted by the government since last month’s election because of complaints about how its officials were treated on the air.
Mr. Johnson himself spurned an invitation to be interviewed by Andrew Neil, a BBC personality whose forensic questioning of prime ministerial candidates had become an election-year ritual in Britain. Ms. Sands described the prime minister’s strategy as “quite Trumpian: to delegitimize the BBC.”
If so, however, it is a hit-or-miss strategy. Mr. Johnson has sat for interviews with other BBC journalists, including Andrew Marr, host of a Sunday morning program. At a news conference on Monday, he did call on the BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, though, unusually, only after calling on half a dozen of her competitors.
Mr. Johnson’s relations with the non-broadcast media have soured quickly, too. Monday’s walkout came after the second time in two weeks that officials handpicked reporters for a briefing.
Tensions had already flared after the government abruptly changed the location of regular briefings for British political journalists — from Parliament to a building adjacent to 10 Downing Street. Some journalists said the new location would make it harder for smaller news organizations, with fewer staff members, to attend.
The bigger fear among journalists is that Mr. Johnson’s influential adviser, Dominic Cummings, wants to shelve a system of organized briefings that take place twice a day while Parliament is in session.
This, the critics contend, is part of a longer-term ambition to bypass the mainstream media, disseminate information directly through social media and cut journalists down to size by making them seem ill-informed and irrelevant.
On Tuesday, lawmakers held a lively debate on press relations, with Pete Wishart, a member of Parliament for the opposition Scottish National Party, calling it a “black day for press freedom.” Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi of the Labour Party argued that “that the Prime Minister and his advisers are merely trying to copy President Trump’s tactics and trying to stifle our free press.”
Last month, the editors of every national newspaper signed a letter protesting the changes. After the walkout, even some Conservative-leaning news outlets that are friendly to Mr. Johnson, like the Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph, pushed back — their dedication to a free press evidently outweighing even their enthusiasm for Brexit.
That appeared to prompt the change in tone from Mr. Johnson and his ministers. After her remarks on the BBC, Ms. Morgan suggested that the prime minister’s top communications aide, Lee Cain, should meet with journalists to discuss access to briefings, something he has refused to do.
Some media analysts were skeptical that Mr. Johnson, emboldened by his election victory, will seek a reconciliation with the press.
“This is a wider issue about reframing the narrative and redrawing the lines of political debate in Britain,” said Meera Selva, director of the Reuters Journalism Fellowship Program at Oxford University. “The government wants to take control of the issues and what gets discussed.”
In the past, she said, government officials might have taken journalists out to lunch to explain their thinking. Now, Ms. Selva said, “They’ve decided either ‘we don’t have time for it,’ or ‘it doesn’t work anyway.’”