On Politics: Our New Morning Tip Sheet
Welcome to our new On Politics morning newsletter, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections, based on reporting by Times journalists and interviews with Democratic and Republican officials, voters, pollsters and strategists.
Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.
Our colleagues Maggie Haberman and Mike Schmidt reported on Sunday that John Bolton, President Trump’s former national security adviser, has circulated a draft of his book to close associates and submitted one to the White House for review.
In the manuscript, Bolton describes how Trump linked the release of $391 million in aid withheld from Ukraine to investigations into Democrats, including Biden.
Bolton’s book appears to contradict the argument by Trump’s legal team that the president withheld aid to fight Ukrainian corruption. And it could add fuel to Democrats’ appeals that the Senate should allow new witnesses and written evidence.
Here’s Maggie on the book’s possible impact on the trial:
Polling shows that a wide majority of Americans think new evidence should be permitted. But Senate Republicans, led by Mitch McConnell, have so far refused to commit to allowing fresh subpoenas. If they hold the line on this, the Senate could vote to acquit Trump as early as Friday.
To bring new evidence, Democrats would need four Republicans to defect and vote with them. And four is exactly the number of Republican senators who have signaled that they might be willing to do it. So all eyes this week will be trained on those senators: Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Mitt Romney of Utah, Susan Collins of Maine and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.
[Read our five takeaways from the Bolton book]
Jon Hathaway went hat in hand for Biden’s signature during a campaign event on Sunday in Des Moines, and the former vice president obliged. (See how many other presidential candidates’ autographs you can spot.)
Iowa this past weekend became a checkerboard of crisscrossing candidates and campaign workers. With the Senate trial adjourned until Monday, Iowa’s five highest-polling contenders were out stumping and rallying crowds across the state.
Amid all that, Biden and Sanders found good news in various new surveys of Iowa, New Hampshire and the country at large.
The Times/Siena College poll of Iowa showed Sanders had consolidated his strength in recent months among young people and the most liberal voters. An online poll of Democrats in Iowa taken by CBS News and YouGov found Sanders and Biden in a virtual tie. Both candidates have increasingly attacked each other over the past two weeks, sparring on Biden’s past positions on Social Security and Sanders’s record on guns.
[The Upshot’s Nate Cohn on why different polls might be showing different results]
Hurling attacks isn’t your usual front-runner behavior, so the weekend’s events seem to reaffirm that the race is too close for any one candidate to claim that title.
Here’s our colleague Sydney Ember, who was covering Sanders this weekend, with her analysis of where he stands:
The Times’s Thomas Kaplan, who was with Biden, said the feeling was a bit different at his events — but that’s to be expected.
While the polls have not been as kind to her recently, Warren got a jolt of good news on Saturday night, when The Des Moines Register, Iowa’s largest newspaper, endorsed her candidacy. When she heard the news, the Massachusetts senator channeled her inner Ellen DeGeneres, busting out a few little dance moves.
Here’s our reporter Shane Goldmacher, who was out with Warren, on how her campaign was responding to the news:
Pete Buttigieg has campaigned relentlessly in Iowa, though his poll numbers have been on a downward slide of late. He is vying for many of the same moderate voters as Biden, but this past weekend he trained his attacks on Sanders.
Polls show that most of the Vermont senator’s supporters see him as the candidate to fundamentally change politics in Washington — but Buttigieg made the opposite argument. Echoing Hillary Clinton’s recent complaint that Sanders was “a career politician,” Buttigieg (without naming Sanders directly) told a crowd in West Des Moines that his opponent represented “the political mind-set that got us here.”
Our colleague Reid J. Epstein was there for Buttigieg’s address at Maple Grove Elementary School. Here’s what Reid had to say about it:
Jonathan Martin contributed reporting from Davenport, Iowa, and Lisa Lerer from Des Moines.
Were you forwarded this newsletter? Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox.
Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.
Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.