On Prison Reform, From the Inside
To the Editor:
Re “How to Fix Our Prisons? Let the Public Inside” (Op-Ed, Dec. 18):
Neil Barsky is right when he writes that the way to fix prisons is to let the public inside them. When I ran juvenile corrections for Washington, D.C., we invited in a raft of outsiders. Georgetown students came every week to visit and tutor, as did a theatrical group from the University of the District of Columbia.
Both a parents’ advocacy group and the Public Defenders Service had offices inside the locked perimeter of the facility. I put the private, nonprofit Maya Angelou Academy in charge of educating the young people, and school officials extended school into the evening and on Saturdays so that the young people who were behind in credits could catch up, often using volunteers to augment paid staff.
The police and victims’ groups worked with the young people to design artwork made from disabled guns confiscated during arrests. A group of formerly incarcerated people provided regular mentorship. We even held a mayoral debate inside the facility moderated by the young people.
Each crack in the previously impenetrable juvenile prison gates helped normalize the young people’s experience and humanize them. Mr. Barsky’s proposal to take that kind of approach nationwide deserves serious consideration.
Vincent Schiraldi
New York
The writer is co-director of the Columbia Justice Lab.
To the Editor:
As a volunteer with one of the organizations Neil Barsky cites, Rehabilitation Through The Arts, I have been going “inside” for four years now, facilitating theater workshops. I have seen firsthand the benefits of such efforts as I watch graduates of our program thrive and contribute to society after their release from prison.
Before starting this work I, like most people, had no idea what went on behind the walls, nor did I have much interest. I now see that it is in society’s best interest to support and expand such programs. The men and women with whom we work learn skills and values many may not have had the opportunity to learn before landing in prison.
The recidivism rate of people who participate in programs like ours is far lower than the general prison population. This means that they are not repeating their mistakes (the people I have worked with fully own their actions and take full responsibility for them). And this means that society is safer.
Would it not be we who benefited by seeing more rehabilitative programs offered so that additional people are not the victims of crime?
Charlie Scatamacchia
Ossining, N.Y.
To the Editor:
I support Neil Barsky’s suggestions for prison life reform through the “Let Us In” movement. College graduates could work with incarcerated men and women in exchange for student debt relief.
Ann L. Berrios
Stony Brook, N.Y.