Showing Rare Focus, Nick Kyrgios Still Falls to Rafael Nadal
MELBOURNE, Australia — For two men who make their living traveling to the same places and pummeling balls across the same nets, Rafael Nadal and Nick Kyrgios have long appeared to have little in common.
Nadal, 33, is a maximizer, a former teen prodigy from Spain who continues to wring every drop of potential from his sturdy frame and spectacular game.
Kyrgios, 24 and gifted, is a puzzler, a flickering talent from Australia who is still sifting through his priorities and still wary of day-in, day-out commitment.
Nadal, by his own admission, is old school. Kyrgios, with his resistance to established codes and authorities, is not.
They have clashed in the past, but they were united in purpose on a cool, gusty Monday evening at the Australian Open. Tennis was the beneficiary as Nadal prevailed, 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (6), 7-6 (4), in a duel that was rich in both razzle-dazzle and grit, just as it was when they faced each other at Wimbledon last year.
Deep in their bones, both craved victory in this fourth-round match in Rod Laver Arena — yes, even Kyrgios, who has been on a mission in 2020, inspired in part by tragedy.
With bushfires ravaging vast stretches of Australia, including many areas near his home city of Canberra, he has been involved in raising funds and awareness. On Monday, he was also intent on honoring Kobe Bryant, the retired N.B.A. star who died in a helicopter accident near Los Angeles on Sunday.
An avid fan of the Boston Celtics and the N.B.A. in general, Kyrgios arrived on court fighting back tears while wearing Bryant’s No. 8 Los Angeles Lakers jersey.
“When I woke up to the news, it was pretty emotional,” Kyrgios said. “It was pretty heavy, like all day.”
He has been battling all tournament, willing and serving his way to victory over Karen Khachanov in a marathon third-round match on Saturday that lasted five sets and four hours and 26 minutes.
Against the No. 1-seeded Nadal, Kyrgios scrapped, dived and went for broke some more.
As the match unfolded, it was hard not to think back on Nadal’s comment about Kyrgios at Wimbledon last year: “Without really loving this game that much, it’s difficult to achieve important things.”
The passion was there on Monday, however. Kyrgios ended up with bloody knuckles, a broken racket and without a spot in the final eight, but it was clear that he had given his all. His mouth might have kept running, but so had he.
“Well, what can I say again about Nick?” Nadal said this time. “I think when he is playing like today, with this positive attitude, he gives a lot of positive things to our sport. So I encourage him to keep working like this because he is one of the highest talents we have on our tour. I like the Nick Kyrgios during this whole tournament.”
That was quite different from last February, when Kyrgios beat Nadal in Acapulco, Mexico. Then, Nadal said Kyrgios lacked respect for his opponents, spectators and himself, and Kyrgios responded by calling Nadal “super salty.” Kyrgios has often criticized Nadal’s slow play, even mocking and mimicking the tics in his service motion during his own matches.
At Wimbledon last year, their match had a definite edge, and, although it ended in a nearly identical score of 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (5), 7-6 (3), Monday’s match was much more about the tennis itself.
It was often spectacular, with Nadal whipping forehand winners down the line into the corner from extreme positions, and Kyrgios conjuring unexpected angles and touch shots.
As at Wimbledon, Kyrgios tried an underarm serve, but this one hit the net instead of surprising Nadal for an ace. As at Wimbledon, he blasted a passing shot at Nadal’s body at the net, and although Nadal missed the reflex volley, this time he did not shoot a dirty look at his opponent.
The underarm serve, sometimes viewed as a cheap tactic, was not a bad play, considering how deep Nadal was standing to return Kyrgios’s serves. Nadal had been trying to limit Kyrgios’s potential reward for hitting huge and risky second serves. Though Kyrgios did finish with 25 aces, all came on first serves, and he won just 37 percent of the points on his second serve.
That hurt him, as did Nadal’s freshness, skill and trademark commitment. The relatively slow playing conditions on this nip-in-the-air evening were no gift from the gods, either.
“I just couldn’t get a ball past him,” the 23rd-seeded Kyrgios said. “I was trying to serve and volley trying to drop shot. Eventually I would have to win the point three times to win a point.”
Nadal will face Dominic Thiem, the No. 5 seed, in the quarterfinals on Wednesday. He and Thiem faced off in the last two French Open finals, with Nadal winning both. The other quarterfinal in the top half of the draw will match No. 7 Alexander Zverev against No. 15 Stan Wawrinka, a former Australian Open champion who defeated No. 4 Daniil Medvedev, 2-6, 6-2, 6-4, 6-7 (2), 6-2, on Monday.
This has been a men’s event awash in long-form matches, and more page-turners should lie ahead with Nadal, Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer all in the mix and with Nadal one title away from tying Federer’s men’s record of 20 Grand Slam singles titles.
Kyrgios has yet to get past a Grand Slam quarterfinal, which is less a reflection of his ability than it is an indication of how much dedication is required to succeed in the age of the Big Three.
For now, Kyrgios, still on ATP Tour probation for a series of incidents last season, remains one of the game’s most intriguing supporting actors.
He has the talent to play a leading role, but that is no guarantee.
“I feel like I’ve made progress as a human,” Kyrgios said after midnight on Tuesday, wearing another Bryant jersey, this one No. 24. “Tennis player, I don’t really care about as much.”