Looking Beyond Life in a Homeless Shelter With 4 Children
Over time, Ryan Rodriguez has earned the nickname Nerves of Steel.
And to all appearances, he’s unflappable. Matter-of-factly and with little hint of stress, he outlines the challenges of being a single father to four children — the oldest of whom is 8 — and living with them for more than a year in homeless shelters.
“It’s something new every other day,” Mr. Rodriguez, 28, said in a recent interview.
His calm demeanor belies a series of setbacks, beyond the struggles of living in several shelters with his family since 2018.
In September, his father died after undergoing treatments for prostate cancer. Two of the aunts who helped raise Mr. Rodriguez with his grandmother have died.
Mr. Rodriguez was 17 when he moved from New York to Florida to live with his mother, who had just given birth and needed help caring for her newborn while she returned to work.
It was in Florida that Mr. Rodriguez met Monica Johns. She was pretty, he said, and her father took a shine to him, treating him to hunting trips and outings on four-wheelers.
The couple had two children — Raelynn and Mason — and in 2013, they moved to New York to be closer to Mr. Rodriguez’s extended family. In 2014, they had Sarihya-Bow and in 2016, Liam.
Mr. Rodriguez and Ms. Johns lived with his grandmother in Washington Heights in Manhattan, but after a while his girlfriend and grandmother clashed. Rising tension between Mr. Rodriguez and Ms. Johns led to a breakup in 2017, which culminated in March 2018, when Ms. Johns unexpectedly left for Florida, leaving him with the children.
Since the children considered New York home, Ms. Johns said she did not want to move them to Florida, where she would not have had the resources to raise them. Such a change would have been selfish, she said.
“I never left my family,” she said. “I did what I thought was best at the time.”
In Florida, she got a job and saved money. About a year later, she returned to New York, where she works as a dispatcher for a company that rents out exotic cars.
In the aftermath of Ms. Johns’s departure, Mr. Rodriguez scrambled.
For a time, he lived in the apartment of an aunt, he and the children sharing a large bed. “One on each leg — that’s how I used to sleep,” he said.
Mr. Rodriguez and his children lived in shelters in Brooklyn and Queens before settling in one in the Bronx for the past year. The disruptions were hard on the children, now 3, 5, 7 and 8, who were uprooted from one school to another, he said.
“I was jumping from place to place,” Mr. Rodriguez said. “If it’s not this, it’s this. If it’s not this, it’s that. The noise doesn’t stop.”
He had worked at a senior center in Washington Heights, where he drove members to City Island, Yankee Stadium and area casinos, but was laid off when it reduced staff. He also has worked as a driver for a trucking company and a painter.
When he was 19, he earned his high school equivalency diploma in Florida. In New York, Mr. Rodriguez studied business for a year at Boricua College and earned an associate degree in criminal justice at Berkeley College in Manhattan.
He said his interest in criminal justice sprang from a lifelong desire to help people. “Helping is just a thrill,” he said.
In keeping with that goal, Mr. Rodriguez has taken the written exam for the Fire Department and in the meantime is looking for a job.
He smiles and shakes his head at the boundless energy of his children. Visits to the movies, Chuck E. Cheese and playgrounds are useful, he said, adding, “With these kids, you need 100 hands.” (One of his brothers helps him.)
In September, when his children were getting ready to return to school, Mr. Rodriguez needed help buying clothes and supplies.
He contacted his case planner at Children’s Aid, one of the seven organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. With help from The Fund, Children’s Aid gave him a $200 Target gift card for school supplies, a $200 Old Navy gift card for clothes and a $100 Key Food gift card.
Looking ahead, he wants to have his own house “close to the city but not too close” — somewhere in Yonkers sounds appealing, he said.
He hopes to secure a housing voucher that will allow his family more space and, perhaps, their own rooms. The Bronx shelter where they now live has one bedroom with two bunk beds.
Mr. Rodriguez recalled being a good student, with a particular skill in math, including taking advanced math classes in grade school. His school was ready to advance him from kindergarten to second grade — Mr. Rodriguez said he was proficient at that age in the multiplication tables — but his family insisted he attend first grade.
He said he very much wants to stabilize his children’s education and for them to be in good schools. Mason, 8, is already showing his father’s aptitude in math, he said.
“It’s been a roller coaster,” Mr. Rodriguez said. But if he gets his way, that ride, with its twists and stomach-lurching drops, will end soon.