What to Cook This Week
Good morning. I’m driving north today into the snow and salt, and if I’m lucky there’ll be sea smoke on the bay when I arrive, hoarfrost in the pine trees, a good fire going inside. I’ll cook then to answer the season: the writer Jim Harrison’s take on a Caribbean stew (above), made from the bounty I’ve got in the cooler in the bed of the truck. So, spareribs, chicken thighs, Italian sausages, onion, garlic, hot pepper sauce, chile powder, paprika, stock. Bubble that along, and then serve it on rice with super-cold beers on the side. The combination tastes of hot summer even in the north woods in the afternoon dark, a meal to eat barefoot in the humidity, as the ceiling fan whirs. Seasonal affective disorder is real, friends. Use your taste buds to fool your brain.
On Monday, try Melissa Clark’s recipe for a farro and broccoli bowl with lemony tahini. (In a pinch, you could use leftover rice from Sunday night in place of the farro. You could also omit the egg, if you want to eat vegan. Whichever, I’d lash the thing with hot sauce.)
Tuesday, I think, would be good for Alison Roman’s recipe for everyday salmon with tangy cucumbers and fried shallots. It’s a simple and elegant feed that I like to serve, on Alison’s suggestion, with jammy boiled chicken eggs and chilled salmon ones.
Alison’s over on Wednesday night as well, with her cold noodles with chile oil and citrusy cabbage. Pair that with some shredded rotisserie chicken or not. It’s an adaptable dinner, and a very good one.
I’ll take you meatless again on Thursday, with Yewande Komolafe’s recipe for roasted squash with turmeric-ginger chickpeas. Add a dollop of yogurt when you serve. The cool creaminess against the warm squash and chickpeas is a delight.
And then you can end the week with a chicken that’s kind of a cross between a braise and a roast: Alison’s vinegar chicken with crisp roasted mushrooms. I like that dish with sour cream and a lot of toasted country bread. It makes me feel sophisticated. I’m not sophisticated, so that’s pretty cool.
There are thousands of other recipes you might cook this week on NYT Cooking. Go browse around as if you were looking for cardigans at Eileen Fisher, and see what intrigues. Yes, to answer those few of you I haven’t spoken to about this in the past, you need a subscription to do that. Subscriptions support our work and allow it to continue. Thank you for yours.
We are on social media when we’re not in your inbox. Find us on Facebook, on Instagram, on Twitter. And do visit us on YouTube, where we do a lot of good work.
Please write for help if you get jammed up with your cooking or our technology. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com. We will get back to you. (If you’d like to escalate matters, you can reach me at foodeditor@nytimes.com. I will do my best to get back to you.)
Now, it’s not about pots, pans or treacle, but our John Williams has me off to the bookseller to get Chris McCormick’s new novel “The Gimmicks.”
I loved this Emily Witt review of Mike Jay’s “Mescaline: A Global History of the First Psychedelic,” in the London Review of Books, mostly because of this sentence. “Jay’s book is as much a literature review as a history,” Witt writes, “and reading it I was reminded how much I love trip reports, especially when they are written by the big thinkers of their day and not by orthographically challenged teenagers on internet forums (though I like those too).” I did not know about trip reports. They are wild.
Finally, here’s Kacey Musgraves, “Merry Go ’Round.” I’ll see you tomorrow.