What to See Right Now in New York Art Galleries
“Souls Grown Diaspora,” a vibrant assemblage of a group show organized by the artist Sam Gordon, proposes that a tradition of African-American self-taught art from the South, represented by the Atlanta-based Souls Grown Deep Foundation, also extends into the northern United States via the early-20th-century Great Migration. Ten contemporary artists chosen by Mr. Gordon eloquently make the case.
Many are, or were, based in New York City. The Bronx-born photographer Alvin Baltrop (1948-2004), the subject of a current retrospective at the Bronx Museum of the Arts (through Feb. 9), shot most of his thousands of pictures in a single Manhattan location, the now-vanished shipping piers on the lower West Side. Otis Houston Jr., who was born in 1954 in South Carolina and goes by the name Black Cherokee, has, since 1997, displayed handwritten signs (“Educate Yourself”) at a spot at the entrance to Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive at 122nd Street.
Until his death at age 47 in 2002, Curtis Cuffie, a tremendously imaginative sculptor, showed work made from scavenged materials on the streets of the Lower East Side. In the East Village, some 50 years ago, Sara Penn (1927-2020) opened Knobkerry, a landmark store-cum-gallery that was one of this country’s earliest global emporiums and functioned as an ever-changing work of installation art.
Like several other of the show’s participants, the Rev. Joyce McDonald, an active street preacher, works with found materials, which she shapes into portraits. (A ceramic bust of her photographer father, Willie McDonald, incorporating his clothing and one of his cameras, is a highlight.) Two non-New Yorkers, Wesley Willis (1963-2003) and Dapper Bruce Lafitte, are street artists in a literal, graphic sense: Mr. Willis produced hundreds of pen-and-ink cityscapes of his hometown, Chicago, while Mr. Lafitte draws meticulously detailed maps of New Orleans, where he was born in 1972.
About half of the artists chosen by Mr. Gordon are also musicians. In the 1990s, Mr. Willis fronted a punk band called Wesley Willis Fiasco. And the Detroit-born artist Stephanie Crawford, a talented still-life painter now in her 70s, has a much-admired and continuing international presence as a jazz vocalist. Recordings of her performances provide a soundtrack for the show.
By contrast, at least two artists in the roster have more private, not to say hermetic, studio practices. Almost all of Raynes Birkbeck’s Afro-futuristic paintings are done in his crowded Upper West Side apartment bedroom. And for many years, Frederick Weston has created elaborate collages — some celebrating Ms. Crawford — in single-room-occupancy hotels in Manhattan, moving a substantial and ever-growing pictorial archive to each new address.
One of those S.R.O.s, the Breslin, is now the site of Ace Hotel New York, where a selection of Mr. Weston’s 1999 collages, addressing his experience of living with H.I.V., is on display. Organized by Gordon Robicaux, a gallery and curatorial agency founded by Mr. Gordon and Jacob Robichaux, the show, “Blue Bedroom Blues,” was timed to complement the apexart exhibition and to coincide with the recent Outsider Art Fair. With their images of palm trees and cloudless blue skies, the collages refer to a very different South from the one of Mr. Weston’s origins — Memphis — but a story of cultural roots and routes still applies.
HOLLAND COTTER
In the 1960s and ’70s, Nicholas Krushenick (1929-1999) made bright punchy paintings, operating at the intersection of Pop, Op and Minimal Art with singular verve and distinction. Altogether, their shiny, saturated Liquitex colors, graphic abstract shapes and black comic-book outlines replaced a sense of the artist’s hand with a gleaming perfection.
But such perfection can start to seem sealed off and emotionally one-dimensional. In contrast, and just as good (if not actually better) are Krushenick’s final studies for the paintings: robustly handmade collages. Like the canvases, the 13 in this fine show, titled “Collage,” broadcast their vitality and formal humor across the gallery.
Above a field of orange and blue diagonals, “Zonk Out” juxtaposes a line of four yellow jagged shapes that resemble mop heads, shag throw pillows or Blondie (Dagwood’s wife) on drugs. In “Navy Lite,” a ziggurat of round-cornered white plinths topped with a dollop shape conjures both soft ice cream and a naval destroyer steaming out to sea. And “Icarus” frames white feather shapes in tongues of yellow sunlight, implying a wing falling toward the blue water below.
Draw closer, and it becomes clear that much of the power of these works comes from their smart, eccentric construction. Rather than glue, discreet staples hold the images’ brightly painted cutout elements together, without flattening them. The different layers of paper have breathing room — actual space between them. Some even cast shadows that serendipitously enhance the black outlines. Interestingly, Mr. Krushenick rarely exhibited his collages in New York. You wonder if he suspected that these tough little rehearsals might outshine the finished product.
ROBERTA SMITH
Eric Brown’s paintings demand close looking, and this doesn’t mean scrutinizing his images on Instagram or the internet. What you observe in the diminutive works in “Longhand” at Theodore:Art is a meticulous approach to painting that might be compared, as the title suggests, to slow, personal methods of writing by hand, as opposed to banging away on a computer.
Mr. Brown’s paintings, all from 2019, conjure other associations, too. One is textiles. Long, snaking lines of paint are composed into grids that resemble loosely woven gauze or knitted fabric. “Weave,” with bright green pigment on a yellow ground has trompe l’oeil “fraying” edges, while “July” mimics the irregular arrangements of vernacular patchwork quilts. “Small Gray” and “Red and Blue” play around with the traditional modernist grid — a staple of 20th-century painting — but in the idiosyncratic manner of artists like Paul Klee. Other paintings here bring to mind mesh screens examined up close, or networks of crackling paint.
“The Mystic” combines several of these ideas. A small, delicate grid with an irregular cross at its center, it suggests painting and miracles as small, everyday occurrences: a poem written out in longhand or a scarf knitted by a beloved, if slightly barmy friend or relative. It also implies, as Klee’s paintings did, that the spiritual in art might happen at small scale, rather than in grand, orchestral gestures.
MARTHA SCHWENDENER