Michelle Phillips: Caribbean Dreamin’
To the Editor:
Re “A Caribbean Eden in Ruins” (Travel, Jan. 26):
In January 1965, John Phillips, Denny Doherty, Cass Elliot and I wandered into the exotic beauty of St. John’s Caneel Bay — pitching our tents in the campsite, a gem of the Virgin Islands National Park.
We lived in our bathing suits and snorkeled with the millions of fish that swam among the coral reefs. We chartered a catamaran every full moon, dipping in and out of the warm Caribbean. We cooked on the grill and drank rum out of freshly opened coconut shells.
When we wanted more glamour, we hopped on our motorbikes and rode up to the Caneel Bay Plantation (now called the Caneel Bay Resort), the Rockefeller resort up the road, to indulge in more drinks and a great tropical lunch — once more abusing our American Express cards. The hotel had a wonderful gift shop, where I bought my first bottle of French perfume — Cabochard, the same I use today.
We made bonfires on the beach at sunset, wrote love songs and sang to John’s sweet guitar. It was truly heaven on earth.
I wept when I read your article about the devastation of St. John and the Caneel Bay Resort from the 2017 hurricanes. I will always cherish those memories shared by that funky little group that became the Mamas and the Papas, our music then in its embryonic state. That May, we left for California, leaving behind the Virgin Islands dream that had changed our lives forever.
Michelle Phillips
Los Angeles
To the Editor:
Re “Attorney General Adds an Arrow to the Quiver of Critics of Bail Reform” (news article, Jan. 29):
Opponents of New York’s bail reform law have enlisted a new ally: Attorney General William P. Barr, who announced federal hate crime charges against a woman whose case has become the rallying cry of bail reform. Exploiting recent anti-Semitic attacks to push for the repeal of important criminal justice reforms is shameful, dangerous and misguided.
Bail reform opponents ignore the actual facts of the anti-Semitic incidents they point to as arguments. In Tiffany Harris’s case, the alleged assault on three Orthodox Jewish women occurred before Ms. Harris was released without bail and before New York’s bail reform went into effect. Presenting the two as related is fundamentally dishonest.
Rolling back criminal justice reforms to “protect” Jewish communities sends a false message that preserving a racist criminal justice system will combat anti-Semitism. Rather than keeping us safe, this divisive approach will only drive a wedge between Jews and the allies we must work with to counter the bigotry that has fueled these recent attacks.
Our leaders should focus on uniting us, not fueling distrust and fear to serve their political interests.
Sharon Kleinbaum
Rachel Timoner
Matt Nosanchuk
New York
Ms. Kleinbaum and Ms. Timoner are rabbis. Mr. Nosanchuk is a lawyer.
To the Editor:
Re “Justices Give Green Light to Trump Plan to Deny Green Cards to Needy Immigrants” (news article, Jan. 28):
I no longer recognize my country. Where is the United States that forged the Marshall Plan to help a devastated Europe after World War II, or the America that welcomed Vietnamese refugees in search of a haven?
All of my grandparents arrived here in the 1910s from Poland with few resources. But their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren went on to become teachers, engineers, Navy pilots, scientists, college professors, veterinarians, doctors, nurses and small-business owners.
Money invested in immigrants at the start provides immense benefits to our country in the long run. We forget that at our peril.
Marcia Bartusiak
Sudbury, Mass.