After Hearing Both Sides in the Trump Trial
To the Editor:
Re “G.O.P. Scrambling to Collect Votes to Bar Witnesses” (front page, Jan. 29):
I have listened to the presentations by both sides in the impeachment trial. As a lawyer, I am perplexed by President Trump’s defense.
First, most legal scholars agree that impeachment does not require a crime, despite arguments otherwise by Mr. Trump’s lawyers. Second, a Ukrainian investigation of Joe Biden and his son has already been conducted, with no finding of misconduct on the part of either of them. Third, how is the Mueller investigation relevant to the impeachment case against Mr. Trump?
Linda Sayler
Oakland, Calif.
To the Editor:
President Trump’s attorneys have argued that it is inappropriate to impeach Mr. Trump so close to an election. Whether or not Mr. Trump remains in office is, so they say, a decision that should be reserved to the people and not to the Senate.
For the people to make an informed decision in November, we are entitled to hear all relevant information. If the president’s team truly believes that this matter is best decided by the people, it should have no objection to the people hearing from all relevant witnesses and seeing all relevant documents.
I want to hear from Mike Pompeo, Mick Mulvaney, John Bolton and Rudy Giuliani under oath. They deserve their chance to explain why Mr. Trump did or did not engage in the actions of which he is accused.
Grant Mindle
Dallas
To the Editor:
Re “The Method in John Bolton’s Madness,” by Jonathan Stevenson (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Jan. 28):
Let’s not put lipstick on a pig. The reason for John Bolton’s sudden “sense of patriotic duty” is revenge, pure and simple. He was ousted by President Trump and he never got over it. Who will trust him now?
Antonia Tamplin
Bronx
To the Editor:
One aspect of both the Nixon and Trump impeachment processes has become more and more obvious: the importance of a free press in the defense of democracy. The Times’s revelation this weekend that John Bolton in his book corroborates the House charge of a quid pro quo may be redirecting the arc of the impeachment trial.
Without the pressure from our free press, Republican senators would easily have ended the trial without additional documents and witnesses. The recent disclosures in this newspaper force senators to rethink their position … a potential game-changer.
Ellen Silverman Popper
Whitestone, Queens
To the Editor:
When I read about Derek Jeter’s election to the Baseball Hall of Fame, amid controversy over the single anonymous vote against him and whether the ballot should remain secret, I was wondering about the upcoming vote at our president’s trial.
What if the vote in the Senate were secret? Clearly having an open vote on all government matters creates a transparent environment critical for a healthy democracy. But who could have foreseen that senators would put self-interest (re-election) and party loyalty (re-election) ahead of the moral and ethical ideals they are supposed to uphold?
If President Trump’s fate were being decided by a secret ballot, would we have the farcical event going on today?
John Garrett
Singapore