I Have $24 in My Savings Account. Can Microsavings Make Me a Better Saver?
I’m 24 years old and currently have $24 in my savings account.
My lack of savings isn’t unique. Young adults face a host of economic foes that stop them from saving. We’re hit with everything from the ever-increasing cost of living to medical bills to student loans to trying to actually have a life, all of which leaves little for the future.
But a new wave of microsavings apps claim to help people like me save more without drastically changing our habits (think saving $1 at a time, rather than $100). Generally, these apps take small amounts of money from a linked bank account and deposit the change into a designated savings or investment account. They promise that your money is safe and your data is encrypted and never sold.
Dan Ariely, behavioral psychologist (and chief behavioral economist at Qapital, one of the apps we tested for this article), said microsaving isn’t an alternative to saving money in more traditional ways. But thanks to the little wins you experience by microsaving, you may become motivated to start saving on a larger scale. “Among other things, it does have the potential to create a feeling of success and maybe even a habit,” Dr. Ariely said.
I know saving fifty bucks a month won’t set me up for retirement. But I need to start somewhere to create a savings mind-set and kick-start good habits, so I decided to test the effectiveness of microsavings apps and see how well they address a range of savings needs.
I narrowed down the list of apps for testing using certain criteria: They had to be insured, data-secure (within reason), and affordable. I looked at associated fees and asked what would happen with my personal information. After living with these apps for about a month, I managed to save some money without feeling deprived. In collaboration with Wirecutter, here are the four apps I tested and which ones I’d stick with.
Monthly fee: $5
How your information is handled: In its privacy policy, Digit says it doesn’t share your personal information with third parties for marketing purposes — but it does collect and share data for other reasons. It also uses your data to tailor its internal ads and offers.
Insurance: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (F.D.I.C.) insured up to $250,000
Digit siphons spare change from your linked checking account. You can set multiple savings goals — think rainy day funds or extra student loan payments — and the app automatically allocates different amounts to each one. You can also connect your credit cards and loans to the app, which enables Digit to actually send your designated savings to those synced accounts. And once you need your money, you can easily transfer it from Digit back to your checking account.
It’s easy to set up and use, and the automated savings go practically unnoticed. I appreciated Digit’s simple, appealing design and relatable lingo. I saved $92.67 in four weeks (including two $5 referral bonuses). I consistently came back to the app at the end of each day, eager to see what I’d saved and be reminded of what I’m saving for.
Don’t worry about saving more than what you’re comfortable with, either. Digit offers a feature called Overdraft Prevention, which pauses the automated savings when it notices you have an account balance lower than a predetermined “safe level” (mine is set at $25), or when you have a big payment coming up on a linked debt (like a student loan or credit card).
Unfortunately, Digit also charges a $5 monthly fee, so you have to deduct that from what you save. That being said, $5 is basically the cost of a Starbucks coffee. For me, it’s a no-brainer to give up one latte to save almost $100 a month without a second thought.
Monthly fee: $3 for Basic membership, $6 for Complete, and $12 for Master
How your information is handled: According to its privacy policy, Qapital does not sell your personal information to third parties, though it does authorize some third-party tracking for behavioral advertising purposes. (You can opt out of those practices through the Network Advertising Initiative and Digital Advertising Alliance websites.)
Insurance: F.D.I.C. insured up to $250,000
Qapital operates similarly to Digit in that it takes spare change from your checking account, but how much is transferred is based on certain savings “rules” you opt in to.
With the “Round Up" rule, for instance, you decide how much you want to round up each of your transactions, and the extra change is deposited into your Qapital account. Other savings rules include “Set and Forget” (establishes recurring automatic transfers), “Payday” (saves a set percentage of each deposit to your funding account), and “Spend Less” (saves the difference when you spend less than your target budget). However, the plethora of options felt a little overwhelming, and the app’s bland design is unappealing, despite all of my customization efforts.
For what it’s worth, I did end up saving about $78 with Qapital’s "Round Up” option. Also, the least-expensive monthly membership is $2 cheaper than Digit, which may be the tipping point if you’re really looking to save every extra penny. You can create an investment portfolio with Qapital’s higher membership tiers, but I’d stick with Basic for your microsavings needs.
Monthly fee: $1 for Invest, $2 for Invest + Later, $3 for Invest + Later + Spend
How your information is handled: According to its privacy policy, none of your personal information is sold to third parties, and Acorns does not share your information for the purposes of third-party marketing.
Insurance: Securities Investor Protection Corporation insured up to $500,000; not F.D.I.C. insured
Like other microsavings apps, Acorns rounds up your purchases and saves the difference — but instead of the funds being deposited into a regular savings account, you’re investing them in a portfolio of exchange-traded funds (E.T.F.s) comprised of stocks and bonds (in partnership with investment management companies Vanguard and BlackRock).
Because you’re saving “change” you may not have missed otherwise, the earnings can help show the value of investing without sacrificing too much of your spending. And by starting early, you can familiarize yourself with how investment portfolios work while watching yours grow over time.
You can’t pick a sole company to invest in — Acorn recommends a particular mix of E.T.F.s based on your financial situation, goals, and the level of risk you’re willing to take on (your options are conservative, moderately conservative, moderate, moderately aggressive, and aggressive). You can see which E.T.F.s you’re investing in based on your particular portfolio, though.
That said, you do have the potential to lose money with Acorns. Markets aren’t always stable, and the value of your portfolio can fluctuate up and down accordingly. And although this may not seem like the best way to sock away money if you’re someone like me — remember, I have only $24 in my savings account — it can be a good option if you have a little more flexibility and an interest in learning how to invest long term.
Annual fee: $0 for a basic account, $9.99 for Pro
How your information is handled: According to its privacy policy, Tip Yourself does not directly sell your personal information to third parties, but de-identified data can be shared with companies, organizations, or individuals outside of Tip Yourself when it has your consent to do so.
Insurance: F.D.I.C. insured up to $250,000
Tip Yourself left me the least engaged, as its whole premise is that you have to decide when to save money — which was what I struggled with in the first place. The app works like this: You “tip yourself” when something good happens (such as when you go to the gym or get a promotion). The money then goes into an insured savings account through the app, though it can easily be transferred back into your checking account when you need it. But what if you have a bad month — heck, a bad six months — and nothing happens that incentivizes you to save?
You’re also supposed to be motivated by seeing others tip themselves on a social feed similar to Venmo.
I never left myself a tip, as I never felt inclined to do so. However, Tip Yourself may be a good option if you aren’t comfortable with automated savings apps and want to maintain control over how much you save and when.
Before testing these apps, I wasn’t sure if I would save any more than usual. It’s just spare change, so how much of a difference could it really make? I kept spending and spending as I normally would.
But by the end of month, I had saved $99 — and I didn’t feel any pain. What I did take notice of is what I typically spend my money on (like dinners out) and how often, as well as how I could do better (like putting more of that dinner money away, or at least the spare change from it).
Using microsavings apps shouldn’t be your forever savings strategy, but it can work for the time being. The positive reinforcement of watching your savings grow can work wonders on how you choose to save for the rest of your life.